CHAPTER I .
TREATS OF THE PLACE WHERE OLIVER TWIST WAS BORN AND OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING HIS BIRTH Among other public building in a certain town , which for many reason it will be prudent to refrain from mentioning , and to which I will assign no fictitious name , there be one anciently common to most town , great or small : to wit , a workhouse ; and in this workhouse be bear ; on a day and date which I need not trouble myself to repeat , inasmuch a it can be of no possible consequence to the reader , in this stage of the business at all event ; the item of mortality whose name be prefix to the head of this chapter .
For a long time after it be usher into this world of sorrow and trouble , by the parish surgeon , it remain a matter of considerable doubt whether the child would survive to bear any name at all ; in which case it be somewhat more than probable that these memoir would never have appear ; or , if they have , that be comprise within a couple of page , they would have possess the inestimable merit of be the most concise and faithful specimen of biography , extant in the literature of any age or country .
Although I be not dispose to maintain that the be bear in a workhouse , be in itself the most fortunate and enviable circumstance that can possibly befall a human be , I do mean to say that in this particular instance , it be the best thing for Oliver Twist that could by possibility have occur .
The fact be , that there be considerable difficulty in induce Oliver to take upon himself the office of respiration , —a troublesome practice , but one which custom have render necessary to our easy existence ; and for some time he lay gasp on a little flock mattress , rather unequally poise between this world and the next : the balance be decidedly in favour of the latter .
Now , if , during this brief period , Oliver have be surround by careful grandmother , anxious aunt , experienced nurse , and doctor of profound wisdom , he would most inevitably and indubitably have be kill in no time .
There be nobody by , however , but a pauper old woman , who be render rather misty by an unwonted allowance of beer ; and a parish surgeon who do such matter by contract ; Oliver and Nature fight out the point between them .
The result be , that , after a few struggle , Oliver breathe , sneeze , and proceed to advertise to the inmate of the workhouse the fact of a new burden have be impose upon the parish , by set up a loud a cry a could reasonably have be expect from a male infant who have not be possess of that very useful appendage , a voice , for a much long space of time than three minute and a quarter .
As Oliver give this first proof of the free and proper action of his lung , the patchwork coverlet which be carelessly fling over the iron bedstead , rustle ; the pale face of a young woman be raise feebly from the pillow ; and a faint voice imperfectly articulate the word , “ Let me see the child , and die. ” The surgeon have be sit with his face turn towards the fire : give the palm of his hand a warm and a rub alternately .
As the young woman speak , he rise , and advance to the bed ’ s head , say , with more kindness than might have be expect of him : “ Oh , you must not talk about die yet. ” “ Lor bless her dear heart , no ! ” interpose the nurse , hastily deposit in her pocket a green glass bottle , the content of which she have be taste in a corner with evident satisfaction .
“ Lor bless her dear heart , when she have live as long a I have , sir , and have thirteen child of her own , and all on ’ em dead except two , and them in the wurkus with me , she ’ ll know good than to take on in that way , bless her dear heart !
Think what it be to be a mother , there ’ s a dear young lamb do. ” Apparently this consolatory perspective of a mother ’ s prospect fail in produce it due effect .
The patient shake her head , and stretch out her hand towards the child .
The surgeon deposit it in her arm .
She imprint her cold white lip passionately on it forehead ; pass her hand over her face ; gaze wildly round ; shudder ; fell back—and die .
They chafe her breast , hand , and temple ; but the blood have stop forever .
They talk of hope and comfort .
They have be stranger too long .
“ It ’ s all over , Mrs. Thingummy ! ” say the surgeon at last .
“ Ah , poor dear , so it be ! ” say the nurse , pick up the cork of the green bottle , which have fall out on the pillow , a she stoop to take up the child .
“ Poor dear ! ” “ You needn ’ t mind send up to me , if the child cry , nurse , ” say the surgeon , put on his glove with great deliberation .
“ It ’ s very likely it _will_ be troublesome .
Give it a little gruel if it is. ” He put on his hat , and , pause by the bed-side on his way to the door , add , “ She be a good-looking girl , too ; where do she come from ? ” “ She be bring here last night , ” reply the old woman , “ by the overseer ’ s order .
She be find lie in the street .
She have walk some distance , for her shoe be wear to piece ; but where she come from , or where she be go to , nobody knows. ” The surgeon lean over the body , and raise the left hand .
“ The old story , ” he say , shake his head : “ no wedding-ring , I see .
Ah !
Good-night ! ” The medical gentleman walk away to dinner ; and the nurse , have once more applied herself to the green bottle , sit down on a low chair before the fire , and proceed to dress the infant .
What an excellent example of the power of dress , young Oliver Twist be !
Wrapped in the blanket which have hitherto form his only covering , he might have be the child of a nobleman or a beggar ; it would have be hard for the haughty stranger to have assign him his proper station in society .
But now that he be envelop in the old calico robe which have grow yellow in the same service , he be badge and ticket , and fell into his place at once—a parish child—the orphan of a workhouse—the humble , half-starved drudge—to be cuff and buffet through the world—despised by all , and pity by none .
Oliver cry lustily .
If he could have know that he be an orphan , leave to the tender mercy of church-wardens and overseer , perhaps he would have cry the louder .
CHAPTER II .
TREATS OF OLIVER TWIST ’ S GROWTH , EDUCATION , AND BOARD For the next eight or ten month , Oliver be the victim of a systematic course of treachery and deception .
He be bring up by hand .
The hungry and destitute situation of the infant orphan be duly report by the workhouse authority to the parish authority .
The parish authority inquire with dignity of the workhouse authority , whether there be no female then domicile in “ the house ” who be in a situation to impart to Oliver Twist , the consolation and nourishment of which he stand in need .
The workhouse authority reply with humility , that there be not .
Upon this , the parish authority magnanimously and humanely resolve , that Oliver should be “ farm , ” or , in other word , that he should be dispatch to a branch-workhouse some three mile off , where twenty or thirty other juvenile offender against the poor-laws , roll about the floor all day , without the inconvenience of too much food or too much clothing , under the parental superintendence of an elderly female , who receive the culprit at and for the consideration of sevenpence-halfpenny per small head per week .
Sevenpence-halfpenny ’ s worth per week be a good round diet for a child ; a great deal may be get for sevenpence-halfpenny , quite enough to overload it stomach , and make it uncomfortable .
The elderly female be a woman of wisdom and experience ; she know what be good for child ; and she have a very accurate perception of what be good for herself .
So , she appropriate the great part of the weekly stipend to her own use , and consign the rise parochial generation to even a short allowance than be originally provide for them .
Thereby find in the low depth a deep still ; and prove herself a very great experimental philosopher .
Everybody know the story of another experimental philosopher who have a great theory about a horse be able to live without eating , and who demonstrate it so well , that he have get his own horse down to a straw a day , and would unquestionably have render him a very spirited and rampacious animal on nothing at all , if he have not die , four-and-twenty hour before he be to have have his first comfortable bait of air .
Unfortunately for the experimental philosophy of the female to whose protect care Oliver Twist be deliver over , a similar result usually attend the operation of _her_ system ; for at the very moment when the child have contrive to exist upon the small possible portion of the weak possible food , it do perversely happen in eight and a half case out of ten , either that it sicken from want and cold , or fell into the fire from neglect , or get half-smothered by accident ; in any one of which case , the miserable little be be usually summon into another world , and there gather to the father it have never know in this .
Occasionally , when there be some more than usually interesting inquest upon a parish child who have be overlook in turn up a bedstead , or inadvertently scald to death when there happen to be a washing—though the latter accident be very scarce , anything approach to a wash be of rare occurrence in the farm—the jury would take it into their head to ask troublesome question , or the parishioner would rebelliously affix their signature to a remonstrance .
But these impertinence be speedily check by the evidence of the surgeon , and the testimony of the beadle ; the former of whom have always open the body and find nothing inside ( which be very probable indeed ) , and the latter of whom invariably swear whatever the parish want ; which be very self-devotional .
Besides , the board make periodical pilgrimage to the farm , and always send the beadle the day before , to say they be go .
The child be neat and clean to behold , when _they_ go ; and what more would the people have !
It can not be expect that this system of farm would produce any very extraordinary or luxuriant crop .
Oliver Twist ’ s ninth birthday find him a pale thin child , somewhat diminutive in stature , and decidedly small in circumference .
But nature or inheritance have implant a good sturdy spirit in Oliver ’ s breast .
It have have plenty of room to expand , thanks to the spare diet of the establishment ; and perhaps to this circumstance may be attribute his have any ninth birth-day at all .
Be this a it may , however , it be his ninth birthday ; and he be keep it in the coal-cellar with a select party of two other young gentleman , who , after participate with him in a sound thrashing , have be lock up for atrociously presume to be hungry , when Mrs. Mann , the good lady of the house , be unexpectedly startle by the apparition of Mr. Bumble , the beadle , strive to undo the wicket of the garden-gate .
“ Goodness gracious !
Is that you , Mr. Bumble , sir ? ” say Mrs. Mann , thrust her head out of the window in well-affected ecstasy of joy .
“ ( Susan , take Oliver and them two brat upstairs , and wash ’ em directly .
) —My heart alive !
Mr. Bumble , how glad I be to see you , sure-ly ! ” Now , Mr. Bumble be a fat man , and a choleric ; so , instead of respond to this open-hearted salutation in a kindred spirit , he give the little wicket a tremendous shake , and then bestow upon it a kick which could have emanate from no leg but a beadle ’ s .
“ Lor , only think , ” say Mrs. Mann , run out , —for the three boy have be remove by this time , — “ only think of that !
That I should have forget that the gate be bolt on the inside , on account of them dear child !
Walk in sir ; walk in , pray , Mr. Bumble , do , sir. ” Although this invitation be accompany with a curtsey that might have soften the heart of a church-warden , it by no mean mollify the beadle .
“ Do you think this respectful or proper conduct , Mrs. Mann , ” inquire Mr. Bumble , grasp his cane , “ to keep the parish officer a wait at your garden-gate , when they come here upon porochial business with the porochial orphan ?
Are you aweer , Mrs. Mann , that you be , a I may say , a porochial delegate , and a stipendiary ? ” “ I ’ m sure Mr. Bumble , that I be only a tell one or two of the dear child a be so fond of you , that it be you a come , ” reply Mrs. Mann with great humility .
Mr. Bumble have a great idea of his oratorical power and his importance .
He have display the one , and vindicate the other .
He relax .
“ Well , well , Mrs. Mann , ” he reply in a calmer tone ; “ it may be a you say ; it may be .
Lead the way in , Mrs. Mann , for I come on business , and have something to say. ” Mrs. Mann usher the beadle into a small parlour with a brick floor ; place a seat for him ; and officiously deposit his cocked hat and cane on the table before him .
Mr. Bumble wipe from his forehead the perspiration which his walk have engender , glance complacently at the cocked hat , and smile .
Yes , he smile .
Beadles be but men : and Mr. Bumble smile .
“ Now don ’ t you be offend at what I ’ m a go to say , ” observe Mrs. Mann , with captivate sweetness .
“ You ’ ve have a long walk , you know , or I wouldn ’ t mention it .
Now , will you take a little drop of somethink , Mr. Bumble ? ” “ Not a drop .
Nor a drop , ” say Mr. Bumble , wave his right hand in a dignified , but placid manner .
“ I think you will , ” say Mrs. Mann , who have notice the tone of the refusal , and the gesture that have accompany it .
“ Just a leetle drop , with a little cold water , and a lump of sugar. ” Mr. Bumble cough .
“ Now , just a leetle drop , ” say Mrs. Mann persuasively .
“ What be it ? ” inquire the beadle .
“ Why , it ’ s what I ’ m oblige to keep a little of in the house , to put into the blessed infant ’ Daffy , when they ain ’ t well , Mr. Bumble , ” reply Mrs. Mann a she open a corner cupboard , and take down a bottle and glass .
“ It ’ s gin .
I ’ ll not deceive you , Mr. B. It ’ s gin. ” “ Do you give the child Daffy , Mrs. Mann ? ” inquire Bumble , follow with his eye the interesting process of mixing .
“ Ah , bless ’ em , that I do , dear a it be , ” reply the nurse .
“ I couldn ’ t see ’ em suffer before my very eyes , you know sir. ” “ No ” ; say Mr. Bumble approvingly ; “ no , you could not .
You be a humane woman , Mrs. Mann. ” ( Here she set down the glass . )
“ I shall take a early opportunity of mention it to the board , Mrs. Mann. ” ( He draw it towards him . )
“ You feel a a mother , Mrs. Mann. ” ( He stir the gin-and-water . )
“ I—I drink your health with cheerfulness , Mrs. Mann ” ; and he swallow half of it .
“ And now about business , ” say the beadle , take out a leathern pocket-book .
“ The child that be half-baptized Oliver Twist , be nine year old to-day. ” “ Bless him ! ” interpose Mrs. Mann , inflame her left eye with the corner of her apron .
“ And notwithstanding a offer reward of ten pound , which be afterwards increase to twenty pound .
Notwithstanding the most superlative , and , I may say , supernat ’ ral exertion on the part of this parish , ” say Bumble , “ we have never be able to discover who be his father , or what be his mother ’ s settlement , name , or condition. ” Mrs. Mann raise her hand in astonishment ; but add , after a moment ’ s reflection , “ How come he to have any name at all , then ? ” The beadle draw himself up with great pride , and say , “ I inwented it. ” “ You , Mr. Bumble ! ” “ I , Mrs. Mann .
We name our fondling in alphabetical order .
The last be a S , —Swubble , I name him .
This be a T , —Twist , I name _him_ .
The next one come will be Unwin , and the next Vilkins .
I have get name ready make to the end of the alphabet , and all the way through it again , when we come to Z. ” “ Why , you ’ re quite a literary character , sir ! ” say Mrs. Mann .
“ Well , well , ” say the beadle , evidently gratify with the compliment ; “ perhaps I may be .
Perhaps I may be , Mrs. Mann. ” He finish the gin-and-water , and add , “ Oliver be now too old to remain here , the board have determine to have him back into the house .
I have come out myself to take him there .
So let me see him at once. ” “ I ’ ll fetch him directly , ” say Mrs. Mann , leave the room for that purpose .
Oliver , have have by this time a much of the outer coat of dirt which encrust his face and hand , remove , a could be scrub off in one washing , be lead into the room by his benevolent protectress .
“ Make a bow to the gentleman , Oliver , ” say Mrs. Mann .
Oliver make a bow , which be divide between the beadle on the chair , and the cocked hat on the table .
“ Will you go along with me , Oliver ? ” say Mr. Bumble , in a majestic voice .
Oliver be about to say that he would go along with anybody with great readiness , when , glance upward , he catch sight of Mrs. Mann , who have get behind the beadle ’ s chair , and be shake her fist at him with a furious countenance .
He take the hint at once , for the fist have be too often impressed upon his body not to be deeply impressed upon his recollection .
“ Will she go with me ? ” inquired poor Oliver .
“ No , she can ’ t , ” reply Mr. Bumble .
“ But she ’ ll come and see you sometimes. ” This be no very great consolation to the child .
Young a he be , however , he have sense enough to make a feint of feel great regret at go away .
It be no very difficult matter for the boy to call tear into his eye .
Hunger and recent ill-usage be great assistant if you want to cry ; and Oliver cry very naturally indeed .
Mrs. Mann give him a thousand embrace , and what Oliver want a great deal more , a piece of bread and butter , le he should seem too hungry when he get to the workhouse .
With the slice of bread in his hand , and the little brown-cloth parish cap on his head , Oliver be then lead away by Mr. Bumble from the wretched home where one kind word or look have never light the gloom of his infant year .
And yet he burst into an agony of childish grief , a the cottage-gate close after him .
Wretched a be the little companion in misery he be leave behind , they be the only friends he have ever know ; and a sense of his loneliness in the great wide world , sink into the child ’ s heart for the first time .
Mr. Bumble walk on with long stride ; little Oliver , firmly grasp his gold-laced cuff , trot beside him , inquire at the end of every quarter of a mile whether they be “ nearly there. ” To these interrogation Mr. Bumble return very brief and snappish reply ; for the temporary blandness which gin-and-water awakens in some bosom have by this time evaporate ; and he be once again a beadle .
Oliver have not be within the wall of the workhouse a quarter of an hour , and have scarcely complete the demolition of a second slice of bread , when Mr. Bumble , who have hand him over to the care of an old woman , return ; and , tell him it be a board night , inform him that the board have say he be to appear before it forthwith .
Not have a very clearly defined notion of what a live board be , Oliver be rather astound by this intelligence , and be not quite certain whether he ought to laugh or cry .
He have no time to think about the matter , however ; for Mr. Bumble give him a tap on the head , with his cane , to wake him up : and another on the back to make him lively : and bid him to follow , conduct him into a large white-washed room , where eight or ten fat gentleman be sit round a table .
At the top of the table , seat in an arm-chair rather high than the rest , be a particularly fat gentleman with a very round , red face .
“ Bow to the board , ” say Bumble .
Oliver brush away two or three tear that be linger in his eye ; and see no board but the table , fortunately bow to that .
“ What ’ s your name , boy ? ” say the gentleman in the high chair .
Oliver be frighten at the sight of so many gentleman , which make him tremble : and the beadle give him another tap behind , which make him cry .
These two cause make him answer in a very low and hesitating voice ; whereupon a gentleman in a white waistcoat say he be a fool .
Which be a capital way of raise his spirit , and put him quite at his ease .
“ Boy , ” say the gentleman in the high chair , “ listen to me .
You know you ’ re an orphan , I suppose ? ” “ What ’ s that , sir ? ” inquire poor Oliver .
“ The boy _is_ a fool—I thought he be , ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
“ Hush ! ” say the gentleman who have speak first .
“ You know you ’ ve get no father or mother , and that you be bring up by the parish , don ’ t you ? ” “ Yes , sir , ” reply Oliver , weep bitterly .
“ What be you cry for ? ” inquire the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
And to be sure it be very extraordinary .
What _could_ the boy be cry for ?
“ I hope you say your prayer every night , ” say another gentleman in a gruff voice ; “ and pray for the people who fee you , and take care of you—like a Christian. ” “ Yes , sir , ” stammer the boy .
The gentleman who speak last be unconsciously right .
It would have be very like a Christian , and a marvellously good Christian too , if Oliver have pray for the people who feed and take care of _him_ .
But he hadn ’ t , because nobody have teach him .
“ Well !
You have come here to be educate , and teach a useful trade , ” say the red-faced gentleman in the high chair .
“ So you ’ ll begin to pick oakum to-morrow morning at six o ’ clock , ” add the surly one in the white waistcoat .
For the combination of both these blessing in the one simple process of pick oakum , Oliver bow low by the direction of the beadle , and be then hurry away to a large ward ; where , on a rough , hard bed , he sob himself to sleep .
What a novel illustration of the tender law of England !
They let the pauper go to sleep !
Poor Oliver !
He little think , a he lay sleep in happy unconsciousness of all around him , that the board have that very day arrive at a decision which would exercise the most material influence over all his future fortune .
But they have .
And this be it : The member of this board be very sage , deep , philosophical men ; and when they come to turn their attention to the workhouse , they find out at once , what ordinary folk would never have discovered—the poor people like it !
It be a regular place of public entertainment for the poorer class ; a tavern where there be nothing to pay ; a public breakfast , dinner , tea , and supper all the year round ; a brick and mortar elysium , where it be all play and no work .
“ Oho ! ” say the board , look very know ; “ we be the fellow to set this to right ; we ’ ll stop it all , in no time. ” So , they establish the rule , that all poor people should have the alternative ( for they would compel nobody , not they ) , of be starve by a gradual process in the house , or by a quick one out of it .
With this view , they contract with the water-works to lay on an unlimited supply of water ; and with a corn-factor to supply periodically small quantity of oatmeal ; and issue three meal of thin gruel a day , with an onion twice a week , and half a roll of Sundays .
They make a great many other wise and humane regulation , have reference to the lady , which it be not necessary to repeat ; kindly undertake to divorce poor married people , in consequence of the great expense of a suit in Doctors ’ Commons ; and , instead of compel a man to support his family , a they have theretofore do , take his family away from him , and make him a bachelor !
There be no say how many applicant for relief , under these last two head , might have start up in all class of society , if it have not be couple with the workhouse ; but the board be long-headed men , and have provide for this difficulty .
The relief be inseparable from the workhouse and the gruel ; and that frightened people .
For the first six month after Oliver Twist be remove , the system be in full operation .
It be rather expensive at first , in consequence of the increase in the undertaker ’ s bill , and the necessity of take in the clothes of all the pauper , which flutter loosely on their waste , shrunken form , after a week or two ’ s gruel .
But the number of workhouse inmate get thin as well a the pauper ; and the board be in ecstasy .
The room in which the boy be feed , be a large stone hall , with a copper at one end : out of which the master , dress in an apron for the purpose , and assist by one or two woman , ladle the gruel at mealtime .
Of this festive composition each boy have one porringer , and no more—except on occasion of great public rejoicing , when he have two ounce and a quarter of bread besides .
The bowl never want washing .
The boy polish them with their spoon till they shine again ; and when they have perform this operation ( which never take very long , the spoon be nearly as large a the bowl ) , they would sit star at the copper , with such eager eye , a if they could have devour the very brick of which it be compose ; employ themselves , meanwhile , in suck their finger most assiduously , with the view of catch up any stray splash of gruel that might have be cast thereon .
Boys have generally excellent appetite .
Oliver Twist and his companion suffer the torture of slow starvation for three month : at last they get so voracious and wild with hunger , that one boy , who be tall for his age , and hadn ’ t be use to that sort of thing ( for his father have keep a small cook-shop ) , hint darkly to his companion , that unless he have another basin of gruel per diem , he be afraid he might some night happen to eat the boy who sleep next him , who happen to be a weakly youth of tender age .
He have a wild , hungry eye ; and they implicitly believe him .
A council be hold ; lot be cast who should walk up to the master after supper that evening , and ask for more ; and it fell to Oliver Twist .
The evening arrive ; the boy take their place .
The master , in his cook ’ s uniform , station himself at the copper ; his pauper assistant range themselves behind him ; the gruel be serve out ; and a long grace be say over the short common .
The gruel disappear ; the boy whisper each other , and wink at Oliver ; while his next neighbor nudge him .
Child a he be , he be desperate with hunger , and reckless with misery .
He rise from the table ; and advance to the master , basin and spoon in hand , say : somewhat alarm at his own temerity : “ Please , sir , I want some more. ” The master be a fat , healthy man ; but he turn very pale .
He gaze in stupefied astonishment on the small rebel for some second , and then clung for support to the copper .
The assistant be paralyse with wonder ; the boy with fear .
“ What ! ” say the master at length , in a faint voice .
“ Please , sir , ” reply Oliver , “ I want some more. ” The master aim a blow at Oliver ’ s head with the ladle ; pinion him in his arm ; and shriek aloud for the beadle .
The board be sit in solemn conclave , when Mr. Bumble rush into the room in great excitement , and address the gentleman in the high chair , say , “ Mr .
Limbkins , I beg your pardon , sir !
Oliver Twist have ask for more ! ” There be a general start .
Horror be depict on every countenance .
“ For _more_ ! ” say Mr. Limbkins .
“ Compose yourself , Bumble , and answer me distinctly .
Do I understand that he ask for more , after he have eat the supper allot by the dietary ? ” “ He do , sir , ” reply Bumble .
“ That boy will be hang , ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
“ I know that boy will be hung. ” Nobody controvert the prophetic gentleman ’ s opinion .
An animated discussion take place .
Oliver be order into instant confinement ; and a bill be next morning paste on the outside of the gate , offer a reward of five pound to anybody who would take Oliver Twist off the hand of the parish .
In other word , five pound and Oliver Twist be offer to any man or woman who want an apprentice to any trade , business , or call .
“ I never be more convinced of anything in my life , ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat , a he knock at the gate and read the bill next morning : “ I never be more convinced of anything in my life , than I be that that boy will come to be hung. ” As I purpose to show in the sequel whether the white waistcoated gentleman be right or not , I should perhaps mar the interest of this narrative ( suppose it to possess any at all ) , if I venture to hint just yet , whether the life of Oliver Twist have this violent termination or no .
CHAPTER III .
RELATES HOW OLIVER TWIST WAS VERY NEAR GETTING A PLACE WHICH WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN A SINECURE For a week after the commission of the impious and profane offence of ask for more , Oliver remain a close prisoner in the dark and solitary room to which he have be consign by the wisdom and mercy of the board .
It appear , at first sight not unreasonable to suppose , that , if he have entertain a become feeling of respect for the prediction of the gentleman in the white waistcoat , he would have establish that sage individual ’ s prophetic character , once and for ever , by tie one end of his pocket-handkerchief to a hook in the wall , and attach himself to the other .
To the performance of this feat , however , there be one obstacle : namely , that pocket-handkerchiefs be decided article of luxury , have be , for all future time and age , remove from the nose of pauper by the express order of the board , in council assemble : solemnly give and pronounce under their hand and seal .
There be a still great obstacle in Oliver ’ s youth and childishness .
He only cry bitterly all day ; and , when the long , dismal night come on , spread his little hand before his eye to shut out the darkness , and crouch in the corner , try to sleep : ever and anon wake with a start and tremble , and draw himself close and closer to the wall , a if to feel even it cold hard surface be a protection in the gloom and loneliness which surround him .
Let it not be suppose by the enemy of “ the system , ” that , during the period of his solitary incarceration , Oliver be deny the benefit of exercise , the pleasure of society , or the advantage of religious consolation .
As for exercise , it be nice cold weather , and he be allow to perform his ablution every morning under the pump , in a stone yard , in the presence of Mr. Bumble , who prevent his catch cold , and cause a tingling sensation to pervade his frame , by repeat application of the cane .
As for society , he be carry every other day into the hall where the boy din , and there sociably flog a a public warning and example .
And so far from be deny the advantage of religious consolation , he be kick into the same apartment every evening at prayer-time , and there permit to listen to , and console his mind with , a general supplication of the boy , contain a special clause , therein insert by authority of the board , in which they entreat to be make good , virtuous , content , and obedient , and to be guard from the sin and vice of Oliver Twist : whom the supplication distinctly set forth to be under the exclusive patronage and protection of the power of wickedness , and an article direct from the manufactory of the very Devil himself .
It chance one morning , while Oliver ’ s affair be in this auspicious and comfortable state , that Mr. Gamfield , chimney-sweep , go his way down the High Street , deeply cogitate in his mind his way and mean of pay certain arrears of rent , for which his landlord have become rather press .
Mr. Gamfield ’ s most sanguine estimate of his finance could not raise them within full five pound of the desired amount ; and , in a specie of arithmetical desperation , he be alternately cudgel his brain and his donkey , when pass the workhouse , his eye encounter the bill on the gate .
“ Wo—o ! ” say Mr. Gamfield to the donkey .
The donkey be in a state of profound abstraction : wondering , probably , whether he be destine to be regale with a cabbage-stalk or two when he have dispose of the two sack of soot with which the little cart be laden ; so , without notice the word of command , he jog onward .
Mr. Gamfield growl a fierce imprecation on the donkey generally , but more particularly on his eye ; and , run after him , bestow a blow on his head , which would inevitably have beat in any skull but a donkey ’ s .
Then , catch hold of the bridle , he give his jaw a sharp wrench , by way of gentle reminder that he be not his own master ; and by these mean turn him round .
He then give him another blow on the head , just to stun him till he come back again .
Having complete these arrangement , he walk up to the gate , to read the bill .
The gentleman with the white waistcoat be stand at the gate with his hand behind him , after have deliver himself of some profound sentiment in the board-room .
Having witness the little dispute between Mr. Gamfield and the donkey , he smile joyously when that person come up to read the bill , for he saw at once that Mr. Gamfield be exactly the sort of master Oliver Twist want .
Mr. Gamfield smile , too , a he peruse the document ; for five pound be just the sum he have be wish for ; and , a to the boy with which it be encumber , Mr. Gamfield , know what the dietary of the workhouse be , well knew he would be a nice small pattern , just the very thing for register stove .
So , he spell the bill through again , from begin to end ; and then , touch his fur cap in token of humility , accost the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
“ This here boy , sir , wot the parish want to ’ prentis , ” say Mr. Gamfield .
“ Ay , my man , ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat , with a condescend smile .
“ What of him ? ” “ If the parish vould like him to learn a right pleasant trade , in a good ’ spectable chimbley-sweepin ’ bisness , ” say Mr. Gamfield , “ I want a ’ prentis , and I be ready to take him. ” “ Walk in , ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
Mr. Gamfield have linger behind , to give the donkey another blow on the head , and another wrench of the jaw , a a caution not to run away in his absence , follow the gentleman with the white waistcoat into the room where Oliver have first see him .
“ It ’ s a nasty trade , ” say Mr. Limbkins , when Gamfield have again state his wish .
“ Young boy have be smother in chimney before now , ” say another gentleman .
“ That ’ s acause they damp the straw afore they light it in the chimbley to make ’ em come down again , ” say Gamfield ; “ that ’ s all smoke , and no blaze ; vereas smoke ain ’ t o ’ no use at all in make a boy come down , for it only sinds him to sleep , and that ’ s wot he like .
Boys be wery obstinit , and wery lazy , Gen ’ l ’ men , and there ’ s nothink like a good hot blaze to make ’ em come down vith a run .
It ’ s humane too , gen ’ l ’ men , acause , even if they ’ ve stick in the chimbley , roast their foot make ’ em struggle to hextricate theirselves. ” The gentleman in the white waistcoat appear very much amuse by this explanation ; but his mirth be speedily check by a look from Mr. Limbkins .
The board then proceed to converse among themselves for a few minute , but in so low a tone , that the word “ save of expenditure , ” “ look well in the account , ” “ have a printed report publish , ” be alone audible .
These only chance to be hear , indeed , or account of their be very frequently repeat with great emphasis .
At length the whispering cease ; and the member of the board , have resume their seat and their solemnity , Mr. Limbkins say : “ We have consider your proposition , and we don ’ t approve of it. ” “ Not at all , ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
“ Decidedly not , ” add the other member .
As Mr. Gamfield do happen to labour under the slight imputation of have bruise three or four boy to death already , it occur to him that the board have , perhaps , in some unaccountable freak , take it into their head that this extraneous circumstance ought to influence their proceeding .
It be very unlike their general mode of do business , if they have ; but still , a he have no particular wish to revive the rumour , he twist his cap in his hand , and walk slowly from the table .
“ So you win ’ t let me have him , gen ’ l ’ men ? ” say Mr. Gamfield , pause near the door .
“ No , ” reply Mr. Limbkins ; “ at least , a it ’ s a nasty business , we think you ought to take something less than the premium we offered. ” Mr. Gamfield ’ s countenance brighten , a , with a quick step , he return to the table , and say , “ What ’ ll you give , gen ’ l ’ men ?
Come !
Don ’ t be too hard on a poor man .
What ’ ll you give ? ” “ I should say , three pound ten be plenty , ” say Mr. Limbkins .
“ Ten shill too much , ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
“ Come ! ” say Gamfield ; “ say four pound , gen ’ l ’ men .
Say four pound , and you ’ ve get rid of him for good and all .
There ! ” “ Three pound ten , ” repeat Mr. Limbkins , firmly .
“ Come !
I ’ ll split the diff ’ erence , gen ’ l ’ men , ” urge Gamfield .
“ Three pound fifteen. ” “ Not a farthing more , ” be the firm reply of Mr. Limbkins .
“ You ’ re desperate hard upon me , gen ’ l ’ men , ” say Gamfield , waver .
“ Pooh !
pooh !
nonsense ! ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
“ He ’ d be cheap with nothing at all , a a premium .
Take him , you silly fellow !
He ’ s just the boy for you .
He want the stick , now and then : it ’ ll do him good ; and his board needn ’ t come very expensive , for he hasn ’ t be overfed since he be bear .
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” Mr. Gamfield give an arch look at the face round the table , and , observe a smile on all of them , gradually break into a smile himself .
The bargain be make .
Mr. Bumble , be at once instruct that Oliver Twist and his indenture be to be convey before the magistrate , for signature and approval , that very afternoon .
In pursuance of this determination , little Oliver , to his excessive astonishment , be release from bondage , and order to put himself into a clean shirt .
He have hardly achieve this very unusual gymnastic performance , when Mr. Bumble bring him , with his own hand , a basin of gruel , and the holiday allowance of two ounce and a quarter of bread .
At this tremendous sight , Oliver begin to cry very piteously : thinking , not unnaturally , that the board must have determine to kill him for some useful purpose , or they never would have begin to fatten him up in that way .
“ Don ’ t make your eye red , Oliver , but eat your food and be thankful , ” say Mr. Bumble , in a tone of impressive pomposity .
“ You ’ re a go to be make a ’ prentice of , Oliver. ” “ A prentice , sir ! ” say the child , tremble .
“ Yes , Oliver , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ The kind and bless gentleman which be so many parent to you , Oliver , when you have none of your own : be a go to “ prentice ” you : and to set you up in life , and make a man of you : although the expense to the parish be three pound ten ! —three pound ten , Oliver ! —seventy shillins—one hundred and forty sixpence ! —and all for a naughty orphan which nobody can ’ t love. ” As Mr. Bumble pause to take breath , after deliver this address in an awful voice , the tear roll down the poor child ’ s face , and he sob bitterly .
“ Come , ” say Mr. Bumble , somewhat less pompously , for it be gratify to his feeling to observe the effect his eloquence have produce ; “ Come , Oliver !
Wipe your eye with the cuff of your jacket , and don ’ t cry into your gruel ; that ’ s a very foolish action , Oliver. ” It certainly be , for there be quite enough water in it already .
On their way to the magistrate , Mr. Bumble instruct Oliver that all he would have to do , would be to look very happy , and say , when the gentleman ask him if he want to be apprentice , that he should like it very much indeed ; both of which injunction Oliver promise to obey : the rather a Mr. Bumble throw in a gentle hint , that if he fail in either particular , there be no tell what would be do to him .
When they arrive at the office , he be shut up in a little room by himself , and admonish by Mr. Bumble to stay there , until he come back to fetch him .
There the boy remain , with a palpitate heart , for half an hour .
At the expiration of which time Mr. Bumble thrust in his head , unadorned with the cocked hat , and say aloud : “ Now , Oliver , my dear , come to the gentleman. ” As Mr. Bumble say this , he put on a grim and threatening look , and add , in a low voice , “ Mind what I tell you , you young rascal ! ” Oliver star innocently in Mr. Bumble ’ s face at this somewhat contradictory style of address ; but that gentleman prevent his offering any remark thereupon , by lead him at once into an adjoining room : the door of which be open .
It be a large room , with a great window .
Behind a desk , sit two old gentleman with powdered head : one of whom be read the newspaper ; while the other be peruse , with the aid of a pair of tortoise-shell spectacle , a small piece of parchment which lay before him .
Mr. Limbkins be stand in front of the desk on one side ; and Mr. Gamfield , with a partially washed face , on the other ; while two or three bluff-looking men , in top-boots , be lounge about .
The old gentleman with the spectacle gradually doze off , over the little bit of parchment ; and there be a short pause , after Oliver have be station by Mr. Bumble in front of the desk .
“ This be the boy , your worship , ” say Mr. Bumble .
The old gentleman who be read the newspaper raise his head for a moment , and pull the other old gentleman by the sleeve ; whereupon , the last-mentioned old gentleman wake up .
“ Oh , be this the boy ? ” say the old gentleman .
“ This be him , sir , ” reply Mr. Bumble .
“ Bow to the magistrate , my dear. ” Oliver rouse himself , and make his best obeisance .
He have be wonder , with his eye fix on the magistrate ’ powder , whether all board be bear with that white stuff on their head , and be board from thenceforth on that account .
“ Well , ” say the old gentleman , “ I suppose he ’ s fond of chimney-sweeping ? ” “ He doats on it , your worship , ” reply Bumble ; give Oliver a sly pinch , to intimate that he have well not say he didn ’ t .
“ And he _will_ be a sweep , will he ? ” inquire the old gentleman .
“ If we be to bind him to any other trade to-morrow , he ’ d run away simultaneous , your worship , ” reply Bumble .
“ And this man that ’ s to be his master—you , sir—you ’ ll treat him well , and fee him , and do all that sort of thing , will you ? ” say the old gentleman .
“ When I say I will , I mean I will , ” reply Mr. Gamfield doggedly .
“ You ’ re a rough speaker , my friend , but you look an honest , open-hearted man , ” say the old gentleman : turn his spectacle in the direction of the candidate for Oliver ’ s premium , whose villainous countenance be a regular stamped receipt for cruelty .
But the magistrate be half blind and half childish , so he couldn ’ t reasonably be expect to discern what other people do .
“ I hope I be , sir , ” say Mr. Gamfield , with an ugly leer .
“ I have no doubt you be , my friend , ” reply the old gentleman : fix his spectacle more firmly on his nose , and look about him for the inkstand .
It be the critical moment of Oliver ’ s fate .
If the inkstand have be where the old gentleman think it be , he would have dip his pen into it , and sign the indenture , and Oliver would have be straightway hurry off .
But , a it chance to be immediately under his nose , it follow , a a matter of course , that he look all over his desk for it , without find it ; and happen in the course of his search to look straight before him , his gaze encounter the pale and terrified face of Oliver Twist : who , despite all the admonitory look and pinch of Bumble , be regard the repulsive countenance of his future master , with a mingled expression of horror and fear , too palpable to be mistake , even by a half-blind magistrate .
The old gentleman stop , lay down his pen , and look from Oliver to Mr. Limbkins ; who attempt to take snuff with a cheerful and unconcerned aspect .
“ My boy ! ” say the old gentleman , “ you look pale and alarmed .
What be the matter ? ” “ Stand a little away from him , Beadle , ” say the other magistrate : laying aside the paper , and lean forward with an expression of interest .
“ Now , boy , tell u what ’ s the matter : don ’ t be afraid. ” Oliver fell on his knee , and clasp his hand together , pray that they would order him back to the dark room—that they would starve him—beat him—kill him if they pleased—rather than send him away with that dreadful man .
“ Well ! ” say Mr. Bumble , raise his hand and eye with most impressive solemnity .
“ Well !
of all the artful and design orphan that ever I see , Oliver , you be one of the most bare-facedest. ” “ Hold your tongue , Beadle , ” say the second old gentleman , when Mr. Bumble have give vent to this compound adjective .
“ I beg your worship ’ s pardon , ” say Mr. Bumble , incredulous of have hear aright .
“ Did your worship speak to me ? ” “ Yes .
Hold your tongue. ” Mr. Bumble be stupefy with astonishment .
A beadle order to hold his tongue !
A moral revolution !
The old gentleman in the tortoise-shell spectacle look at his companion , he nod significantly .
“ We refuse to sanction these indenture , ” say the old gentleman : tossing aside the piece of parchment a he speak .
“ I hope , ” stammer Mr. Limbkins : “ I hope the magistrate will not form the opinion that the authority have be guilty of any improper conduct , on the unsupported testimony of a child. ” “ The magistrate be not call upon to pronounce any opinion on the matter , ” say the second old gentleman sharply .
“ Take the boy back to the workhouse , and treat him kindly .
He seem to want it. ” That same evening , the gentleman in the white waistcoat most positively and decidedly affirm , not only that Oliver would be hang , but that he would be draw and quarter into the bargain .
Mr. Bumble shake his head with gloomy mystery , and say he wish he might come to good ; whereunto Mr. Gamfield reply , that he wish he might come to him ; which , although he agree with the beadle in most matter , would seem to be a wish of a totally opposite description .
The next morning , the public be once inform that Oliver Twist be again To Let , and that five pound would be pay to anybody who would take possession of him .
CHAPTER IV .
OLIVER , BEING OFFERED ANOTHER PLACE , MAKES HIS FIRST ENTRY INTO PUBLIC LIFE In great family , when an advantageous place can not be obtain , either in possession , reversion , remainder , or expectancy , for the young man who be grow up , it be a very general custom to send him to sea .
The board , in imitation of so wise and salutary an example , take counsel together on the expediency of ship off Oliver Twist , in some small trading vessel bind to a good unhealthy port .
This suggest itself a the very best thing that could possibly be do with him : the probability be , that the skipper would flog him to death , in a playful mood , some day after dinner , or would knock his brain out with an iron bar ; both pastime be , a be pretty generally know , very favourite and common recreation among gentleman of that class .
The more the case present itself to the board , in this point of view , the more manifold the advantage of the step appear ; so , they come to the conclusion that the only way of provide for Oliver effectually , be to send him to sea without delay .
Mr. Bumble have be despatch to make various preliminary inquiry , with the view of find out some captain or other who want a cabin-boy without any friend ; and be return to the workhouse to communicate the result of his mission ; when he encounter at the gate , no less a person than Mr. Sowerberry , the parochial undertaker .
Mr. Sowerberry be a tall gaunt , large-jointed man , attire in a suit of threadbare black , with darned cotton stocking of the same colour , and shoe to answer .
His feature be not naturally intend to wear a smile aspect , but he be in general rather give to professional jocosity .
His step be elastic , and his face betoken inward pleasantry , a he advance to Mr. Bumble , and shake him cordially by the hand .
“ I have take the measure of the two woman that die last night , Mr. Bumble , ” say the undertaker .
“ You ’ ll make your fortune , Mr. Sowerberry , ” say the beadle , a he thrust his thumb and forefinger into the proffered snuff-box of the undertaker : which be an ingenious little model of a patent coffin .
“ I say you ’ ll make your fortune , Mr. Sowerberry , ” repeat Mr. Bumble , tap the undertaker on the shoulder , in a friendly manner , with his cane .
“ Think so ? ” say the undertaker in a tone which half admit and half dispute the probability of the event .
“ The price allow by the board be very small , Mr. Bumble. ” “ So be the coffin , ” reply the beadle : with precisely a near an approach to a laugh a a great official ought to indulge in .
Mr. Sowerberry be much tickle at this : a of course he ought to be ; and laugh a long time without cessation .
“ Well , well , Mr. Bumble , ” he say at length , “ there ’ s no denying that , since the new system of feeding have come in , the coffin be something narrow and more shallow than they use to be ; but we must have some profit , Mr. Bumble .
Well-seasoned timber be an expensive article , sir ; and all the iron handle come , by canal , from Birmingham. ” “ Well , well , ” say Mr. Bumble , “ every trade have it drawback .
A fair profit be , of course , allowable. ” “ Of course , of course , ” reply the undertaker ; “ and if I don ’ t get a profit upon this or that particular article , why , I make it up in the long-run , you see—he !
he !
he ! ” “ Just so , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ Though I must say , ” continue the undertaker , resume the current of observation which the beadle have interrupt : “ though I must say , Mr. Bumble , that I have to contend against one very great disadvantage : which be , that all the stout people go off the quick .
The people who have be good off , and have pay rate for many year , be the first to sink when they come into the house ; and let me tell you , Mr. Bumble , that three or four inch over one ’ s calculation make a great hole in one ’ s profit : especially when one have a family to provide for , sir. ” As Mr. Sowerberry say this , with the become indignation of an ill-used man ; and a Mr. Bumble felt that it rather tend to convey a reflection on the honour of the parish ; the latter gentleman think it advisable to change the subject .
Oliver Twist be uppermost in his mind , he make him his theme .
“ By the bye , ” say Mr. Bumble , “ you don ’ t know anybody who want a boy , do you ?
A porochial ’ prentis , who be at present a dead-weight ; a millstone , a I may say , round the porochial throat ?
Liberal term , Mr. Sowerberry , liberal term ? ” As Mr. Bumble speak , he raise his cane to the bill above him , and give three distinct rap upon the word “ five pound ” : which be print thereon in Roman capital of gigantic size .
“ Gadso ! ” say the undertaker : take Mr. Bumble by the gilt-edged lappel of his official coat ; “ that ’ s just the very thing I want to speak to you about .
You know—dear me , what a very elegant button this be , Mr. Bumble !
I never notice it before. ” “ Yes , I think it rather pretty , ” say the beadle , glance proudly downwards at the large brass button which embellish his coat .
“ The die be the same a the porochial seal—the Good Samaritan heal the sick and bruised man .
The board present it to me on Newyear ’ s morning , Mr. Sowerberry .
I put it on , I remember , for the first time , to attend the inquest on that reduced tradesman , who die in a doorway at midnight. ” “ I recollect , ” say the undertaker .
“ The jury bring it in , ‘ Died from exposure to the cold , and want of the common necessary of life , ’ didn ’ t they ? ” Mr. Bumble nod .
“ And they make it a special verdict , I think , ” say the undertaker , “ by add some word to the effect , that if the relieve officer had— ” “ Tush !
Foolery ! ” interpose the beadle .
“ If the board attend to all the nonsense that ignorant juryman talk , they ’ d have enough to do. ” “ Very true , ” say the undertaker ; “ they would indeed. ” “ Juries , ” say Mr. Bumble , grasp his cane tightly , a be his wont when work into a passion : “ jury be ineddicated , vulgar , grovel wretches. ” “ So they be , ” say the undertaker .
“ They haven ’ t no more philosophy nor political economy about ’ em than that , ” say the beadle , snap his finger contemptuously .
“ No more they have , ” acquiesce the undertaker .
“ I despise ’ em , ” say the beadle , grow very red in the face .
“ So do I , ” rejoin the undertaker .
“ And I only wish we ’ d a jury of the independent sort , in the house for a week or two , ” say the beadle ; “ the rule and regulation of the board would soon bring their spirit down for ’ em. ” “ Let ’ em alone for that , ” reply the undertaker .
So say , he smile , approvingly : to calm the rise wrath of the indignant parish officer .
Mr Bumble lift off his cocked hat ; take a handkerchief from the inside of the crown ; wipe from his forehead the perspiration which his rage have engender ; fix the cock hat on again ; and , turn to the undertaker , say in a calm voice : “ Well ; what about the boy ? ” “ Oh ! ” reply the undertaker ; “ why , you know , Mr. Bumble , I pay a good deal towards the poor ’ s rates. ” “ Hem ! ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ Well ? ” “ Well , ” reply the undertaker , “ I be think that if I pay so much towards ’ em , I ’ ve a right to get as much out of ’ em a I can , Mr. Bumble ; and so—I think I ’ ll take the boy myself. ” Mr. Bumble grasp the undertaker by the arm , and lead him into the building .
Mr. Sowerberry be closet with the board for five minute ; and it be arrange that Oliver should go to him that even “ upon like ” —a phrase which mean , in the case of a parish apprentice , that if the master find , upon a short trial , that he can get enough work out of a boy without put too much food into him , he shall have him for a term of year , to do what he like with .
When little Oliver be take before “ the gentleman ” that evening ; and inform that he be to go , that night , a general house-lad to a coffin-maker ’ s ; and that if he complain of his situation , or ever come back to the parish again , he would be send to sea , there to be drown , or knock on the head , a the case might be , he evince so little emotion , that they by common consent pronounce him a harden young rascal , and order Mr. Bumble to remove him forthwith .
Now , although it be very natural that the board , of all people in the world , should feel in a great state of virtuous astonishment and horror at the small token of want of feel on the part of anybody , they be rather out , in this particular instance .
The simple fact be , that Oliver , instead of possess too little feeling , possess rather too much ; and be in a fair way of be reduce , for life , to a state of brutal stupidity and sullenness by the ill usage he have receive .
He hear the news of his destination , in perfect silence ; and , have have his luggage put into his hand—which be not very difficult to carry , inasmuch a it be all comprise within the limit of a brown paper parcel , about half a foot square by three inch deep—he pull his cap over his eye ; and once more attach himself to Mr. Bumble ’ s coat cuff , be lead away by that dignitary to a new scene of suffering .
For some time , Mr. Bumble draw Oliver along , without notice or remark ; for the beadle carry his head very erect , a a beadle always should : and , it be a windy day , little Oliver be completely enshroud by the skirt of Mr. Bumble ’ s coat a they blow open , and disclose to great advantage his flapped waistcoat and drab plush knee-breeches .
As they draw near to their destination , however , Mr. Bumble think it expedient to look down , and see that the boy be in good order for inspection by his new master : which he accordingly do , with a fit and become air of gracious patronage .
“ Oliver ! ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ Yes , sir , ” reply Oliver , in a low , tremulous voice .
“ Pull that cap off your eye , and hold up your head , sir. ” Although Oliver do a he be desire , at once ; and pass the back of his unoccupied hand briskly across his eye , he leave a tear in them when he look up at his conductor .
As Mr. Bumble gaze sternly upon him , it roll down his cheek .
It be follow by another , and another .
The child make a strong effort , but it be an unsuccessful one .
Withdrawing his other hand from Mr. Bumble ’ s he cover his face with both ; and wept until the tear spring out from between his chin and bony finger .
“ Well ! ” exclaim Mr. Bumble , stop short , and dart at his little charge a look of intense malignity .
“ Well !
Of _all_ the ungratefullest , and worst-disposed boy a ever I see , Oliver , you be the— ” “ No , no , sir , ” sob Oliver , cling to the hand which hold the well-known cane ; “ no , no , sir ; I will be good indeed ; indeed , indeed I will , sir !
I be a very little boy , sir ; and it be so—so— ” “ So what ? ” inquire Mr. Bumble in amazement .
“ So lonely , sir !
So very lonely ! ” cry the child .
“ Everybody hat me .
Oh !
sir , don ’ t , don ’ t pray be cross to me ! ” The child beat his hand upon his heart ; and look in his companion ’ s face , with tear of real agony .
Mr. Bumble regard Oliver ’ s piteous and helpless look , with some astonishment , for a few second ; hem three or four time in a husky manner ; and after mutter something about “ that troublesome cough , ” bid Oliver dry his eye and be a good boy .
Then once more take his hand , he walk on with him in silence .
The undertaker , who have just put up the shutter of his shop , be make some entry in his day-book by the light of a most appropriate dismal candle , when Mr. Bumble enter .
“ Aha ! ” say the undertaker ; look up from the book , and pause in the middle of a word ; “ be that you , Bumble ? ” “ No one else , Mr. Sowerberry , ” reply the beadle .
“ Here !
I ’ ve bring the boy. ” Oliver make a bow .
“ Oh !
that ’ s the boy , be it ? ” say the undertaker : raise the candle above his head , to get a good view of Oliver .
“ Mrs .
Sowerberry , will you have the goodness to come here a moment , my dear ? ” Mrs. Sowerberry emerge from a little room behind the shop , and present the form of a short , thin , squeezed-up woman , with a vixenish countenance .
“ My dear , ” say Mr. Sowerberry , deferentially , “ this be the boy from the workhouse that I tell you of. ” Oliver bow again .
“ Dear me ! ” say the undertaker ’ s wife , “ he ’ s very small. ” “ Why , he _is_ rather small , ” reply Mr. Bumble : look at Oliver a if it be his fault that he be no big ; “ he be small .
There ’ s no deny it .
But he ’ ll grow , Mrs. Sowerberry—he ’ ll grow. ” “ Ah !
I dare say he will , ” reply the lady pettishly , “ on our victual and our drink .
I see no save in parish child , not I ; for they always cost more to keep , than they ’ re worth .
However , men always think they know best .
There !
Get downstairs , little bag o ’ bones. ” With this , the undertaker ’ s wife open a side door , and push Oliver down a steep flight of stair into a stone cell , damp and dark : form the ante-room to the coal-cellar , and denominate “ kitchen ” ; wherein sit a slatternly girl , in shoe down at heel , and blue worsted stocking very much out of repair .
“ Here , Charlotte , ” say Mr. Sowerberry , who have follow Oliver down , “ give this boy some of the cold bit that be put by for Trip .
He hasn ’ t come home since the morning , so he may go without ’ em .
I dare say the boy isn ’ t too dainty to eat ’ em—are you , boy ? ” Oliver , whose eye have glisten at the mention of meat , and who be tremble with eagerness to devour it , reply in the negative ; and a plateful of coarse broken victual be set before him .
I wish some well-fed philosopher , whose meat and drink turn to gall within him ; whose blood be ice , whose heart be iron ; could have see Oliver Twist clutch at the dainty viands that the dog have neglect .
I wish he could have witness the horrible avidity with which Oliver tear the bit asunder with all the ferocity of famine .
There be only one thing I should like good ; and that would be to see the Philosopher make the same sort of meal himself , with the same relish .
“ Well , ” say the undertaker ’ s wife , when Oliver have finish his supper : which she have regard in silent horror , and with fearful augury of his future appetite : “ have you do ? ” There be nothing eatable within his reach , Oliver reply in the affirmative .
“ Then come with me , ” say Mrs. Sowerberry : take up a dim and dirty lamp , and lead the way upstairs ; “ your bed ’ s under the counter .
You don ’ t mind sleeping among the coffin , I suppose ?
But it doesn ’ t much matter whether you do or don ’ t , for you can ’ t sleep anywhere else .
Come ; don ’ t keep me here all night ! ” Oliver linger no longer , but meekly follow his new mistress .
CHAPTER V. OLIVER MINGLES WITH NEW ASSOCIATES .
GOING TO A FUNERAL FOR THE FIRST TIME , HE FORMS AN UNFAVOURABLE NOTION OF HIS MASTER ’ S BUSINESS Oliver , be leave to himself in the undertaker ’ s shop , set the lamp down on a workman ’ s bench , and gaze timidly about him with a feeling of awe and dread , which many people a good deal old than he will be at no loss to understand .
An unfinished coffin on black tressels , which stand in the middle of the shop , look so gloomy and death-like that a cold tremble come over him , every time his eye wander in the direction of the dismal object : from which he almost expect to see some frightful form slowly rear it head , to drive him mad with terror .
Against the wall be range , in regular array , a long row of elm board cut in the same shape : look in the dim light , like high-shouldered ghost with their hand in their breech pocket .
Coffin-plates , elm-chips , bright-headed nail , and shred of black cloth , lay scatter on the floor ; and the wall behind the counter be ornament with a lively representation of two mute in very stiff neckcloth , on duty at a large private door , with a hearse draw by four black steed , approach in the distance .
The shop be close and hot .
The atmosphere seem taint with the smell of coffin .
The recess beneath the counter in which his flock mattress be thrust , look like a grave .
Nor be these the only dismal feeling which depress Oliver .
He be alone in a strange place ; and we all know how chilled and desolate the best of u will sometimes feel in such a situation .
The boy have no friend to care for , or to care for him .
The regret of no recent separation be fresh in his mind ; the absence of no loved and well-remembered face sink heavily into his heart .
But his heart be heavy , notwithstanding ; and he wish , a he creep into his narrow bed , that that be his coffin , and that he could be lie in a calm and lasting sleep in the churchyard ground , with the tall grass wave gently above his head , and the sound of the old deep bell to soothe him in his sleep .
Oliver be awaken in the morning , by a loud kicking at the outside of the shop-door : which , before he could huddle on his clothes , be repeat , in an angry and impetuous manner , about twenty-five time .
When he begin to undo the chain , the leg desist , and a voice begin .
“ Open the door , will yer ? ” cry the voice which belong to the leg which have kick at the door .
“ I will , directly , sir , ” reply Oliver : undo the chain , and turn the key .
“ I suppose yer the new boy , ain ’ t yer ? ” say the voice through the key-hole .
“ Yes , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ How old be yer ? ” inquire the voice .
“ Ten , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ Then I ’ ll whop yer when I get in , ” say the voice ; “ you just see if I don ’ t , that ’ s all , my work ’ u brat ! ” and have make this oblige promise , the voice begin to whistle .
Oliver have be too often subject to the process to which the very expressive monosyllable just record bear reference , to entertain the small doubt that the owner of the voice , whoever he might be , would redeem his pledge , most honourably .
He draw back the bolt with a tremble hand , and open the door .
For a second or two , Oliver glance up the street , and down the street , and over the way : impressed with the belief that the unknown , who have address him through the key-hole , have walk a few pace off , to warm himself ; for nobody do he see but a big charity-boy , sit on a post in front of the house , eat a slice of bread and butter : which he cut into wedge , the size of his mouth , with a clasp-knife , and then consume with great dexterity .
“ I beg your pardon , sir , ” say Oliver at length : seeing that no other visitor make his appearance ; “ do you knock ? ” “ I kick , ” reply the charity-boy .
“ Did you want a coffin , sir ? ” inquire Oliver , innocently .
At this , the charity-boy look monstrous fierce ; and say that Oliver would want one before long , if he cut joke with his superior in that way .
“ Yer don ’ t know who I be , I suppose , Work ’ u ? ” say the charity-boy , in continuation : descending from the top of the post , meanwhile , with edify gravity .
“ No , sir , ” rejoin Oliver .
“ I ’ m Mister Noah Claypole , ” say the charity-boy , “ and you ’ re under me .
Take down the shutter , yer idle young ruffian ! ” With this , Mr. Claypole administer a kick to Oliver , and enter the shop with a dignified air , which do him great credit .
It be difficult for a large-headed , small-eyed youth , of lumber make and heavy countenance , to look dignified under any circumstance ; but it be more especially so , when superadded to these personal attraction be a red nose and yellow small .
Oliver , have take down the shutter , and break a pane of glass in his effort to stagger away beneath the weight of the first one to a small court at the side of the house in which they be keep during the day , be graciously assist by Noah : who have console him with the assurance that “ he ’ d catch it , ” condescend to help him .
Mr. Sowerberry come down soon after .
Shortly afterwards , Mrs. Sowerberry appear .
Oliver have “ catch it , ” in fulfilment of Noah ’ s prediction , follow that young gentleman down the stair to breakfast .
“ Come near the fire , Noah , ” say Charlotte .
“ I save a nice little bit of bacon for you from master ’ s breakfast .
Oliver , shut that door at Mister Noah ’ s back , and take them bit that I ’ ve put out on the cover of the bread-pan .
There ’ s your tea ; take it away to that box , and drink it there , and make haste , for they ’ ll want you to mind the shop .
D ’ ye hear ? ” “ D ’ ye hear , Work ’ u ? ” say Noah Claypole .
“ Lor , Noah ! ” say Charlotte , “ what a rum creature you be !
Why don ’ t you let the boy alone ? ” “ Let him alone ! ” say Noah .
“ Why everybody let him alone enough , for the matter of that .
Neither his father nor his mother will ever interfere with him .
All his relation let him have his own way pretty well .
Eh , Charlotte ?
He !
he !
he ! ” “ Oh , you queer soul ! ” say Charlotte , burst into a hearty laugh , in which she be join by Noah ; after which they both look scornfully at poor Oliver Twist , a he sit shiver on the box in the cold corner of the room , and eat the stale piece which have be specially reserve for him .
Noah be a charity-boy , but not a workhouse orphan .
No chance-child be he , for he could trace his genealogy all the way back to his parent , who live hard by ; his mother be a washerwoman , and his father a drunken soldier , discharge with a wooden leg , and a diurnal pension of twopence-halfpenny and an unstateable fraction .
The shop-boys in the neighbourhood have long be in the habit of brand Noah in the public street , with the ignominious epithet of “ leather , ” “ charity , ” and the like ; and Noah have bourne them without reply .
But , now that fortune have cast in his way a nameless orphan , at whom even the mean could point the finger of scorn , he retort on him with interest .
This afford charm food for contemplation .
It show u what a beautiful thing human nature may be make to be ; and how impartially the same amiable quality be develop in the fine lord and the dirty charity-boy .
Oliver have be sojourn at the undertaker ’ s some three week or a month .
Mr. and Mrs. Sowerberry—the shop be shut up—were take their supper in the little back-parlour , when Mr. Sowerberry , after several deferential glance at his wife , say , “ My dear— ” He be go to say more ; but , Mrs. Sowerberry look up , with a peculiarly unpropitious aspect , he stop short .
“ Well , ” say Mrs. Sowerberry , sharply .
“ Nothing , my dear , nothing , ” say Mr. Sowerberry .
“ Ugh , you brute ! ” say Mrs. Sowerberry .
“ Not at all , my dear , ” say Mr. Sowerberry humbly .
“ I think you didn ’ t want to hear , my dear .
I be only go to say— ” “ Oh , don ’ t tell me what you be go to say , ” interpose Mrs. Sowerberry .
“ I be nobody ; don ’ t consult me , pray .
_I_ don ’ t want to intrude upon your secrets. ” As Mrs. Sowerberry say this , she give an hysterical laugh , which threaten violent consequence .
“ But , my dear , ” say Sowerberry , “ I want to ask your advice. ” “ No , no , don ’ t ask mine , ” reply Mrs. Sowerberry , in an affecting manner : “ ask somebody else ’ s. ” Here , there be another hysterical laugh , which frighten Mr. Sowerberry very much .
This be a very common and much-approved matrimonial course of treatment , which be often very effective .
It at once reduce Mr. Sowerberry to beg , a a special favour , to be allow to say what Mrs. Sowerberry be most curious to hear .
After a short duration , the permission be most graciously concede .
“ It ’ s only about young Twist , my dear , ” say Mr. Sowerberry .
“ A very good-looking boy , that , my dear. ” “ He need be , for he eat enough , ” observe the lady .
“ There ’ s an expression of melancholy in his face , my dear , ” resume Mr. Sowerberry , “ which be very interesting .
He would make a delightful mute , my love. ” Mrs. Sowerberry look up with an expression of considerable wonderment .
Mr. Sowerberry remark it and , without allow time for any observation on the good lady ’ s part , proceed .
“ I don ’ t mean a regular mute to attend grown-up people , my dear , but only for child ’ s practice .
It would be very new to have a mute in proportion , my dear .
You may depend upon it , it would have a superb effect. ” Mrs. Sowerberry , who have a good deal of taste in the undertaking way , be much strike by the novelty of this idea ; but , a it would have be compromise her dignity to have say so , under exist circumstance , she merely inquire , with much sharpness , why such an obvious suggestion have not present itself to her husband ’ s mind before ?
Mr. Sowerberry rightly construe this , a an acquiescence in his proposition ; it be speedily determine , therefore , that Oliver should be at once initiate into the mystery of the trade ; and , with this view , that he should accompany his master on the very next occasion of his service be require .
The occasion be not long in come .
Half an hour after breakfast next morning , Mr. Bumble enter the shop ; and support his cane against the counter , draw forth his large leathern pocket-book : from which he select a small scrap of paper , which he hand over to Sowerberry .
“ Aha ! ” say the undertaker , glance over it with a lively countenance ; “ an order for a coffin , eh ? ” “ For a coffin first , and a porochial funeral afterwards , ” reply Mr. Bumble , fasten the strap of the leathern pocket-book : which , like himself , be very corpulent .
“ Bayton , ” say the undertaker , look from the scrap of paper to Mr. Bumble .
“ I never hear the name before. ” Bumble shake his head , a he reply , “ Obstinate people , Mr. Sowerberry ; very obstinate .
Proud , too , I ’ m afraid , sir. ” “ Proud , eh ? ” exclaim Mr. Sowerberry with a sneer .
“ Come , that ’ s too much. ” “ Oh , it ’ s sickening , ” reply the beadle .
“ Antimonial , Mr. Sowerberry ! ” “ So it be , ” acquiesce the undertaker .
“ We only hear of the family the night before last , ” say the beadle ; “ and we shouldn ’ t have know anything about them , then , only a woman who lodge in the same house make an application to the porochial committee for them to send the porochial surgeon to see a woman a be very bad .
He have go out to dinner ; but his ’ prentice ( which be a very clever lad ) send ’ em some medicine in a blacking-bottle , offhand. ” “ Ah , there ’ s promptness , ” say the undertaker .
“ Promptness , indeed ! ” reply the beadle .
“ But what ’ s the consequence ; what ’ s the ungrateful behaviour of these rebel , sir ?
Why , the husband send back word that the medicine win ’ t suit his wife ’ s complaint , and so she shan ’ t take it—says she shan ’ t take it , sir !
Good , strong , wholesome medicine , a be give with great success to two Irish labourer and a coal-heaver , only a week before—sent ’ em for nothing , with a blackin ’ -bottle in , —and he send back word that she shan ’ t take it , sir ! ” As the atrocity present itself to Mr. Bumble ’ s mind in full force , he strike the counter sharply with his cane , and become flush with indignation .
“ Well , ” say the undertaker , “ I ne—ver—did— ” “ Never do , sir ! ” ejaculate the beadle .
“ No , nor nobody never do ; but now she ’ s dead , we ’ ve get to bury her ; and that ’ s the direction ; and the sooner it ’ s do , the better. ” Thus say , Mr. Bumble put on his cock hat wrong side first , in a fever of parochial excitement ; and flounce out of the shop .
“ Why , he be so angry , Oliver , that he forget even to ask after you ! ” say Mr. Sowerberry , look after the beadle a he stride down the street .
“ Yes , sir , ” reply Oliver , who have carefully keep himself out of sight , during the interview ; and who be shake from head to foot at the mere recollection of the sound of Mr. Bumble ’ s voice .
He needn ’ t haven take the trouble to shrink from Mr. Bumble ’ s glance , however ; for that functionary , on whom the prediction of the gentleman in the white waistcoat have make a very strong impression , think that now the undertaker have get Oliver upon trial the subject be well avoid , until such time a he should be firmly bind for seven year , and all danger of his be return upon the hand of the parish should be thus effectually and legally overcome .
“ Well , ” say Mr. Sowerberry , take up his hat , “ the sooner this job be do , the good .
Noah , look after the shop .
Oliver , put on your cap , and come with me. ” Oliver obey , and follow his master on his professional mission .
They walk on , for some time , through the most crowded and densely inhabited part of the town ; and then , strike down a narrow street more dirty and miserable than any they have yet pass through , pause to look for the house which be the object of their search .
The house on either side be high and large , but very old , and tenant by people of the poor class : a their neglected appearance would have sufficiently denote , without the concurrent testimony afford by the squalid look of the few men and woman who , with folded arm and body half double , occasionally skulk along .
A great many of the tenement have shop-fronts ; but these be fast close , and moulder away ; only the upper room be inhabit .
Some house which have become insecure from age and decay , be prevent from fall into the street , by huge beam of wood rear against the wall , and firmly plant in the road ; but even these crazy den seem to have be select a the nightly haunt of some houseless wretch , for many of the rough board which supply the place of door and window , be wrench from their position , to afford an aperture wide enough for the passage of a human body .
The kennel be stagnant and filthy .
The very rat , which here and there lay putrefy in it rottenness , be hideous with famine .
There be neither knocker nor bell-handle at the open door where Oliver and his master stop ; so , grope his way cautiously through the dark passage , and bidding Oliver keep close to him and not be afraid the undertaker mount to the top of the first flight of stair .
Stumbling against a door on the landing , he rap at it with his knuckle .
It be open by a young girl of thirteen or fourteen .
The undertaker at once saw enough of what the room contain , to know it be the apartment to which he have be direct .
He step in ; Oliver follow him .
There be no fire in the room ; but a man be crouch , mechanically , over the empty stove .
An old woman , too , have draw a low stool to the cold hearth , and be sit beside him .
There be some ragged child in another corner ; and in a small recess , opposite the door , there lay upon the ground , something cover with an old blanket .
Oliver shudder a he cast his eye toward the place , and creep involuntarily closer to his master ; for though it be cover up , the boy felt that it be a corpse .
The man ’ s face be thin and very pale ; his hair and beard be grizzly ; his eye be bloodshot .
The old woman ’ s face be wrinkle ; her two remain teeth protrude over her under lip ; and her eye be bright and piercing .
Oliver be afraid to look at either her or the man .
They seem so like the rat he have see outside .
“ Nobody shall go near her , ” say the man , start fiercely up , a the undertaker approach the recess .
“ Keep back !
Damn you , keep back , if you ’ ve a life to lose ! ” “ Nonsense , my good man , ” say the undertaker , who be pretty well use to misery in all it shape .
“ Nonsense ! ” “ I tell you , ” say the man : clench his hand , and stamp furiously on the floor , — “ I tell you I win ’ t have her put into the ground .
She couldn ’ t rest there .
The worm would worry her—not eat her—she be so worn away. ” The undertaker offer no reply to this raving ; but produce a tape from his pocket , kneel down for a moment by the side of the body .
“ Ah ! ” say the man : bursting into tear , and sink on his knee at the foot of the dead woman ; “ kneel down , kneel down—kneel round her , every one of you , and mark my word !
I say she be starve to death .
I never know how bad she be , till the fever come upon her ; and then her bone be start through the skin .
There be neither fire nor candle ; she die in the dark—in the dark !
She couldn ’ t even see her child ’ s face , though we hear her gasp out their name .
I beg for her in the street : and they send me to prison .
When I come back , she be die ; and all the blood in my heart have dry up , for they starve her to death .
I swear it before the God that saw it !
They starve her ! ” He twin his hand in his hair ; and , with a loud scream , roll grovel upon the floor : his eye fix , and the foam cover his lip .
The terrified child cry bitterly ; but the old woman , who have hitherto remain as quiet a if she have be wholly deaf to all that pass , menace them into silence .
Having unloosen the cravat of the man who still remain extend on the ground , she totter towards the undertaker .
“ She be my daughter , ” say the old woman , nod her head in the direction of the corpse ; and speak with an idiotic leer , more ghastly than even the presence of death in such a place .
“ Lord , Lord !
Well , it _is_ strange that I who give birth to her , and be a woman then , should be alive and merry now , and she lie there : so cold and stiff !
Lord , Lord ! —to think of it ; it ’ s as good a a play—as good a a play ! ” As the wretched creature mumble and chuckle in her hideous merriment , the undertaker turn to go away .
“ Stop , stop ! ” say the old woman in a loud whisper .
“ Will she be bury to-morrow , or next day , or to-night ?
I lay her out ; and I must walk , you know .
Send me a large cloak : a good warm one : for it be bitter cold .
We should have cake and wine , too , before we go !
Never mind ; send some bread—only a loaf of bread and a cup of water .
Shall we have some bread , dear ? ” she say eagerly : catching at the undertaker ’ s coat , a he once more moved towards the door .
“ Yes , yes , ” say the undertaker , ” of course .
Anything you like ! ” He disengage himself from the old woman ’ s grasp ; and , draw Oliver after him , hurry away .
The next day , ( the family have be meanwhile relieve with a half-quartern loaf and a piece of cheese , leave with them by Mr. Bumble himself , ) Oliver and his master return to the miserable abode ; where Mr. Bumble have already arrive , accompany by four men from the workhouse , who be to act a bearer .
An old black cloak have be throw over the rag of the old woman and the man ; and the bare coffin have be screw down , be hoist on the shoulder of the bearer , and carry into the street .
“ Now , you must put your best leg foremost , old lady ! ” whisper Sowerberry in the old woman ’ s ear ; “ we be rather late ; and it win ’ t do , to keep the clergyman wait .
Move on , my men , —as quick a you like ! ” Thus direct , the bearer trot on under their light burden ; and the two mourner keep a near them , a they could .
Mr. Bumble and Sowerberry walk at a good smart pace in front ; and Oliver , whose leg be not so long a his master ’ s , ran by the side .
There be not so great a necessity for hurry a Mr. Sowerberry have anticipate , however ; for when they reach the obscure corner of the churchyard in which the nettle grow , and where the parish graf be make , the clergyman have not arrive ; and the clerk , who be sit by the vestry-room fire , seem to think it by no mean improbable that it might be an hour or so , before he come .
So , they put the bier on the brink of the grave ; and the two mourner wait patiently in the damp clay , with a cold rain drizzle down , while the ragged boy whom the spectacle have attract into the churchyard play a noisy game at hide-and-seek among the tombstone , or vary their amusement by jump backwards and forward over the coffin .
Mr. Sowerberry and Bumble , be personal friend of the clerk , sit by the fire with him , and read the paper .
At length , after a lapse of something more than an hour , Mr. Bumble , and Sowerberry , and the clerk , be see run towards the grave .
Immediately afterwards , the clergyman appear : put on his surplice a he come along .
Mr. Bumble then thrash a boy or two , to keep up appearance ; and the reverend gentleman , have read a much of the burial service a could be compress into four minute , give his surplice to the clerk , and walk away again .
“ Now , Bill ! ” say Sowerberry to the grave-digger .
“ Fill up ! ” It be no very difficult task , for the grave be so full , that the uppermost coffin be within a few foot of the surface .
The grave-digger shovel in the earth ; stamp it loosely down with his foot : shoulder his spade ; and walk off , follow by the boy , who murmur very loud complaint at the fun be over so soon .
“ Come , my good fellow ! ” say Bumble , tap the man on the back .
“ They want to shut up the yard. ” The man who have never once move , since he have take his station by the grave side , start , raise his head , star at the person who have address him , walk forward for a few pace ; and fell down in a swoon .
The crazy old woman be too much occupy in bewail the loss of her cloak ( which the undertaker have take off ) , to pay him any attention ; so they throw a can of cold water over him ; and when he come to , saw him safely out of the churchyard , lock the gate , and depart on their different way .
“ Well , Oliver , ” say Sowerberry , a they walk home , “ how do you like it ? ” “ Pretty well , thank you , sir ” reply Oliver , with considerable hesitation .
“ Not very much , sir. ” “ Ah , you ’ ll get use to it in time , Oliver , ” say Sowerberry .
“ Nothing when you _are_ use to it , my boy. ” Oliver wonder , in his own mind , whether it have take a very long time to get Mr. Sowerberry use to it .
But he think it well not to ask the question ; and walk back to the shop : thinking over all he have see and hear .
CHAPTER VI .
OLIVER , BEING GOADED BY THE TAUNTS OF NOAH , ROUSES INTO ACTION , AND RATHER ASTONISHES HIM The month ’ s trial over , Oliver be formally apprentice .
It be a nice sickly season just at this time .
In commercial phrase , coffin be look up ; and , in the course of a few week , Oliver acquire a great deal of experience .
The success of Mr. Sowerberry ’ s ingenious speculation , exceed even his most sanguine hope .
The old inhabitant recollect no period at which measles have be so prevalent , or so fatal to infant existence ; and many be the mournful procession which little Oliver head , in a hat-band reach down to his knee , to the indescribable admiration and emotion of all the mother in the town .
As Oliver accompany his master in most of his adult expedition too , in order that he might acquire that equanimity of demeanour and full command of nerve which be essential to a finish undertaker , he have many opportunity of observe the beautiful resignation and fortitude with which some strong-minded people bear their trial and loss .
For instance ; when Sowerberry have an order for the burial of some rich old lady or gentleman , who be surround by a great number of nephew and niece , who have be perfectly inconsolable during the previous illness , and whose grief have be wholly irrepressible even on the most public occasion , they would be a happy among themselves a need be—quite cheerful and contented—conversing together with as much freedom and gaiety , a if nothing whatever have happen to disturb them .
Husbands , too , bore the loss of their wife with the most heroic calmness .
Wives , again , put on weed for their husband , a if , so far from grieve in the garb of sorrow , they have make up their mind to render it a become and attractive a possible .
It be observable , too , that lady and gentleman who be in passion of anguish during the ceremony of interment , recover almost as soon a they reach home , and become quite compose before the tea-drinking be over .
All this be very pleasant and improve to see ; and Oliver behold it with great admiration .
That Oliver Twist be move to resignation by the example of these good people , I can not , although I be his biographer , undertake to affirm with any degree of confidence ; but I can most distinctly say , that for many month he continue meekly to submit to the domination and ill-treatment of Noah Claypole : who use him far bad than before , now that his jealousy be rouse by see the new boy promote to the black stick and hatband , while he , the old one , remain stationary in the muffin-cap and leather .
Charlotte treat him ill , because Noah do ; and Mrs. Sowerberry be his decided enemy , because Mr. Sowerberry be dispose to be his friend ; so , between these three on one side , and a glut of funeral on the other , Oliver be not altogether as comfortable a the hungry pig be , when he be shut up , by mistake , in the grain department of a brewery .
And now , I come to a very important passage in Oliver ’ s history ; for I have to record an act , slight and unimportant perhaps in appearance , but which indirectly produce a material change in all his future prospect and proceeding .
One day , Oliver and Noah have descend into the kitchen at the usual dinner-hour , to banquet upon a small joint of mutton—a pound and a half of the bad end of the neck—when Charlotte be call out of the way , there ensue a brief interval of time , which Noah Claypole , be hungry and vicious , consider he could not possibly devote to a worthy purpose than aggravate and tantalise young Oliver Twist .
Intent upon this innocent amusement , Noah put his foot on the table-cloth ; and pull Oliver ’ s hair ; and twitch his ear ; and express his opinion that he be a “ sneak ” ; and furthermore announce his intention of come to see him hang , whenever that desirable event should take place ; and enter upon various topic of petty annoyance , like a malicious and ill-conditioned charity-boy a he be .
But , make Oliver cry , Noah attempt to be more facetious still ; and in his attempt , do what many sometimes do to this day , when they want to be funny .
He get rather personal .
“ Work ’ u , ” say Noah , “ how ’ s your mother ? ” “ She ’ s dead , ” reply Oliver ; “ don ’ t you say anything about her to me ! ” Oliver ’ s colour rise a he say this ; he breathe quickly ; and there be a curious working of the mouth and nostril , which Mr. Claypole think must be the immediate precursor of a violent fit of cry .
Under this impression he return to the charge .
“ What do she die of , Work ’ u ? ” say Noah .
“ Of a broken heart , some of our old nurse tell me , ” reply Oliver : more a if he be talk to himself , than answer Noah .
“ I think I know what it must be to die of that ! ” “ Tol de rol lol lol , right fol lairy , Work ’ u , ” say Noah , a a tear roll down Oliver ’ s cheek .
“ What ’ s set you a snivel now ? ” “ Not _you_ , ” reply Oliver , sharply .
“ There ; that ’ s enough .
Don ’ t say anything more to me about her ; you ’ d good not ! ” “ Better not ! ” exclaim Noah .
“ Well !
Better not !
Work ’ u , don ’ t be impudent .
_Your_ mother , too !
She be a nice ’ un she be .
Oh , Lor ! ” And here , Noah nod his head expressively ; and curl up as much of his small red nose a muscular action could collect together , for the occasion .
“ Yer know , Work ’ u , ” continue Noah , embolden by Oliver ’ s silence , and speak in a jeer tone of affected pity : of all tone the most annoying : “ Yer know , Work ’ u , it can ’ t be help now ; and of course yer couldn ’ t help it then ; and I be very sorry for it ; and I ’ m sure we all be , and pity yer very much .
But yer must know , Work ’ u , yer mother be a regular right-down bad ’ un. ” “ What do you say ? ” inquired Oliver , look up very quickly .
“ A regular right-down bad ’ un , Work ’ u , ” reply Noah , coolly .
“ And it ’ s a great deal well , Work ’ u , that she die when she do , or else she ’ d have be hard labouring in Bridewell , or transport , or hung ; which be more likely than either , isn ’ t it ? ” Crimson with fury , Oliver start up ; overthrew the chair and table ; seize Noah by the throat ; shake him , in the violence of his rage , till his teeth chatter in his head ; and collect his whole force into one heavy blow , fell him to the ground .
A minute ago , the boy have look the quiet child , mild , dejected creature that harsh treatment have make him .
But his spirit be rouse at last ; the cruel insult to his dead mother have set his blood on fire .
His breast heave ; his attitude be erect ; his eye bright and vivid ; his whole person change , a he stand glare over the cowardly tormentor who now lay crouch at his foot ; and defy him with an energy he have never know before .
“ He ’ ll murder me ! ” blubber Noah .
“ Charlotte !
missis !
Here ’ s the new boy a murdering of me !
Help !
help !
Oliver ’ s go mad !
Char—lotte ! ” Noah ’ s shout be respond to , by a loud scream from Charlotte , and a louder from Mrs. Sowerberry ; the former of whom rush into the kitchen by a side-door , while the latter pause on the staircase till she be quite certain that it be consistent with the preservation of human life , to come far down .
“ Oh , you little wretch ! ” scream Charlotte : seize Oliver with her utmost force , which be about equal to that of a moderately strong man in particularly good training .
“ Oh , you little un-grate-ful , mur-de-rous , hor-rid villain ! ” And between every syllable , Charlotte give Oliver a blow with all her might : accompany it with a scream , for the benefit of society .
Charlotte ’ s fist be by no mean a light one ; but , l it should not be effectual in calm Oliver ’ s wrath , Mrs. Sowerberry plunge into the kitchen , and assist to hold him with one hand , while she scratch his face with the other .
In this favourable position of affair , Noah rise from the ground , and pommel him behind .
This be rather too violent exercise to last long .
When they be all weary out , and could tear and beat no long , they drag Oliver , struggle and shout , but nothing daunted , into the dust-cellar , and there lock him up .
This be do , Mrs. Sowerberry sink into a chair , and burst into tear .
“ Bless her , she ’ s go off ! ” say Charlotte .
“ A glass of water , Noah , dear .
Make haste ! ” “ Oh !
Charlotte , ” say Mrs. Sowerberry : speaking as well a she could , through a deficiency of breath , and a sufficiency of cold water , which Noah have pour over her head and shoulder .
“ Oh !
Charlotte , what a mercy we have not all be murder in our bed ! ” “ Ah !
mercy indeed , ma ’ be , ” be the reply .
I only hope this ’ ll teach master not to have any more of these dreadful creature , that be bear to be murderer and robber from their very cradle .
Poor Noah !
He be all but kill , ma ’ be , when I come in. ” “ Poor fellow ! ” say Mrs. Sowerberry : look piteously on the charity-boy .
Noah , whose top waistcoat-button might have be somewhere on a level with the crown of Oliver ’ s head , rub his eye with the inside of his wrist while this commiseration be bestow upon him , and perform some affect tear and sniff .
“ What ’ s to be do ! ” exclaim Mrs. Sowerberry .
“ Your master ’ s not at home ; there ’ s not a man in the house , and he ’ ll kick that door down in ten minutes. ” Oliver ’ s vigorous plunge against the bit of timber in question , render this occurance highly probable .
“ Dear , dear !
I don ’ t know , ma ’ be , ” say Charlotte , “ unless we send for the police-officers. ” “ Or the millingtary , ” suggest Mr. Claypole .
“ No , no , ” say Mrs. Sowerberry : bethink herself of Oliver ’ s old friend .
“ Run to Mr. Bumble , Noah , and tell him to come here directly , and not to lose a minute ; never mind your cap !
Make haste !
You can hold a knife to that black eye , a you run along .
It ’ ll keep the swell down. ” Noah stop to make no reply , but start off at his full speed ; and very much it astonish the people who be out walking , to see a charity-boy tearing through the street pell-mell , with no cap on his head , and a clasp-knife at his eye .
CHAPTER VII .
OLIVER CONTINUES REFRACTORY Noah Claypole run along the street at his swift pace , and pause not once for breath , until he reach the workhouse-gate .
Having rest here , for a minute or so , to collect a good burst of sob and an impose show of tear and terror , he knock loudly at the wicket ; and present such a rueful face to the age pauper who open it , that even he , who saw nothing but rueful face about him at the best of time , start back in astonishment .
“ Why , what ’ s the matter with the boy ! ” say the old pauper .
“ Mr .
Bumble !
Mr. Bumble ! ” cry Noah , with well-affected dismay : and in tone so loud and agitated , that they not only catch the ear of Mr. Bumble himself , who happen to be hard by , but alarm him so much that he rush into the yard without his cocked hat , —which be a very curious and remarkable circumstance : a show that even a beadle , act upon a sudden and powerful impulse , may be afflict with a momentary visitation of loss of self-possession , and forgetfulness of personal dignity .
“ Oh , Mr. Bumble , sir ! ” say Noah : “ Oliver , sir , —Oliver has— ” “ What ?
What ? ” interpose Mr. Bumble : with a gleam of pleasure in his metallic eye .
“ Not run away ; he hasn ’ t run away , have he , Noah ? ” “ No , sir , no .
Not run away , sir , but he ’ s turn wicious , ” reply Noah .
“ He try to murder me , sir ; and then he try to murder Charlotte ; and then missis .
Oh !
what dreadful pain it be !
Such agony , please , sir ! ” And here , Noah writhe and twist his body into an extensive variety of eel-like position ; thereby give Mr. Bumble to understand that , from the violent and sanguinary onset of Oliver Twist , he have sustain severe internal injury and damage , from which he be at that moment suffer the acute torture .
When Noah saw that the intelligence he communicate perfectly paralyse Mr. Bumble , he impart additional effect thereunto , by bewail his dreadful wound ten time louder than before ; and when he observe a gentleman in a white waistcoat cross the yard , he be more tragic in his lamentation than ever : rightly conceive it highly expedient to attract the notice , and rouse the indignation , of the gentleman aforesaid .
The gentleman ’ s notice be very soon attract ; for he have not walk three pace , when he turn angrily round , and inquire what that young cur be howl for , and why Mr. Bumble do not favour him with something which would render the series of vocular exclamation so designate , an involuntary process ?
“ It ’ s a poor boy from the free-school , sir , ” reply Mr. Bumble , “ who have be nearly murdered—all but murder , sir , —by young Twist. ” “ By Jove ! ” exclaim the gentleman in the white waistcoat , stop short .
“ I know it !
I felt a strange presentiment from the very first , that that audacious young savage would come to be hung ! ” “ He have likewise attempt , sir , to murder the female servant , ” say Mr. Bumble , with a face of ashy paleness .
“ And his missis , ” interpose Mr. Claypole .
“ And his master , too , I think you say , Noah ? ” add Mr. Bumble .
“ No !
he ’ s out , or he would have murder him , ” reply Noah .
“ He say he want to. ” “ Ah !
Said he want to , do he , my boy ? ” inquire the gentleman in the white waistcoat .
“ Yes , sir , ” reply Noah .
“ And please , sir , missis want to know whether Mr. Bumble can spare time to step up there , directly , and flog him— ’ cause master ’ s out. ” “ Certainly , my boy ; certainly , ” say the gentleman in the white waistcoat : smile benignly , and pat Noah ’ s head , which be about three inch high than his own .
“ You ’ re a good boy—a very good boy .
Here ’ s a penny for you .
Bumble , just step up to Sowerberry ’ s with your cane , and see what ’ s best to be do .
Don ’ t spare him , Bumble. ” “ No , I will not , sir , ” reply the beadle .
And the cock hat and cane have be , by this time , adjust to their owner ’ s satisfaction , Mr. Bumble and Noah Claypole betook themselves with all speed to the undertaker ’ s shop .
Here the position of affair have not at all improve .
Sowerberry have not yet return , and Oliver continue to kick , with undiminished vigour , at the cellar-door .
The account of his ferocity a relate by Mrs. Sowerberry and Charlotte , be of so startle a nature , that Mr. Bumble judge it prudent to parley , before open the door .
With this view he give a kick at the outside , by way of prelude ; and , then , apply his mouth to the keyhole , say , in a deep and impressive tone : “ Oliver ! ” “ Come ; you let me out ! ” reply Oliver , from the inside .
“ Do you know this here voice , Oliver ? ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ Yes , ” reply Oliver .
“ Ain ’ t you afraid of it , sir ?
Ain ’ t you a-trembling while I speak , sir ? ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ No ! ” reply Oliver , boldly .
An answer so different from the one he have expect to elicit , and be in the habit of receiving , stagger Mr. Bumble not a little .
He step back from the keyhole ; draw himself up to his full height ; and look from one to another of the three bystander , in mute astonishment .
“ Oh , you know , Mr. Bumble , he must be mad , ” say Mrs. Sowerberry .
“ No boy in half his sens could venture to speak so to you. ” “ It ’ s not Madness , ma ’ be , ” reply Mr. Bumble , after a few moment of deep meditation .
“ It ’ s Meat. ” “ What ? ” exclaim Mrs. Sowerberry .
“ Meat , ma ’ be , meat , ” reply Bumble , with stern emphasis .
“ You ’ ve over-fed him , ma ’ be .
You ’ ve raise a artificial soul and spirit in him , ma ’ be unbecoming a person of his condition : a the board , Mrs. Sowerberry , who be practical philosopher , will tell you .
What have pauper to do with soul or spirit ?
It ’ s quite enough that we let ’ em have live body .
If you have keep the boy on gruel , ma ’ be , this would never have happened. ” “ Dear , dear ! ” ejaculate Mrs. Sowerberry , piously raise her eye to the kitchen ceiling : “ this come of be liberal ! ” The liberality of Mrs. Sowerberry to Oliver , have consist of a profuse bestowal upon him of all the dirty odds and end which nobody else would eat ; so there be a great deal of meekness and self-devotion in her voluntarily remain under Mr. Bumble ’ s heavy accusation .
Of which , to do her justice , she be wholly innocent , in thought , word , or deed .
“ Ah ! ” say Mr. Bumble , when the lady bring her eye down to earth again ; “ the only thing that can be do now , that I know of , be to leave him in the cellar for a day or so , till he ’ s a little starved down ; and then to take him out , and keep him on gruel all through the apprenticeship .
He come of a bad family .
Excitable nature , Mrs. Sowerberry !
Both the nurse and doctor say , that that mother of his make her way here , against difficulty and pain that would have kill any well-disposed woman , week before. ” At this point of Mr. Bumble ’ s discourse , Oliver , just hear enough to know that some allusion be be make to his mother , recommence kicking , with a violence that render every other sound inaudible .
Sowerberry return at this juncture .
Oliver ’ s offence have be explain to him , with such exaggeration a the lady think best calculate to rouse his ire , he unlock the cellar-door in a twinkling , and drag his rebellious apprentice out , by the collar .
Oliver ’ s clothes have be tear in the beating he have receive ; his face be bruise and scratch ; and his hair scatter over his forehead .
The angry flush have not disappear , however ; and when he be pull out of his prison , he scowl boldly on Noah , and look quite undismayed .
“ Now , you be a nice young fellow , ain ’ t you ? ” say Sowerberry ; give Oliver a shake , and a box on the ear .
“ He call my mother name , ” reply Oliver .
“ Well , and what if he do , you little ungrateful wretch ? ” say Mrs. Sowerberry .
“ She deserve what he say , and worse. ” “ She didn ’ t ” say Oliver .
“ She do , ” say Mrs. Sowerberry .
“ It ’ s a lie ! ” say Oliver .
Mrs. Sowerberry burst into a flood of tear .
This flood of tear leave Mr. Sowerberry no alternative .
If he have hesitate for one instant to punish Oliver most severely , it must be quite clear to every experienced reader that he would have be , accord to all precedent in dispute of matrimony establish , a brute , an unnatural husband , an insulting creature , a base imitation of a man , and various other agreeable character too numerous for recital within the limit of this chapter .
To do him justice , he be , as far a his power went—it be not very extensive—kindly disposed towards the boy ; perhaps , because it be his interest to be so ; perhaps , because his wife dislike him .
The flood of tear , however , leave him no resource ; so he at once give him a drubbing , which satisfy even Mrs. Sowerberry herself , and render Mr. Bumble ’ s subsequent application of the parochial cane , rather unnecessary .
For the rest of the day , he be shut up in the back kitchen , in company with a pump and a slice of bread ; and at night , Mrs. Sowerberry , after make various remark outside the door , by no mean complimentary to the memory of his mother , look into the room , and , amidst the jeer and pointings of Noah and Charlotte , order him upstairs to his dismal bed .
It be not until he be leave alone in the silence and stillness of the gloomy workshop of the undertaker , that Oliver give way to the feeling which the day ’ s treatment may be suppose likely to have awaken in a mere child .
He have listen to their taunt with a look of contempt ; he have bear the lash without a cry : for he felt that pride swell in his heart which would have keep down a shriek to the last , though they have roast him alive .
But now , when there be none to see or hear him , he fell upon his knee on the floor ; and , hide his face in his hand , weep such tear a , God send for the credit of our nature , few so young may ever have cause to pour out before him !
For a long time , Oliver remain motionless in this attitude .
The candle be burn low in the socket when he rise to his foot .
Having gaze cautiously round him , and listen intently , he gently undo the fastening of the door , and look abroad .
It be a cold , dark night .
The star seem , to the boy ’ s eye , far from the earth than he have ever see them before ; there be no wind ; and the sombre shadow throw by the tree upon the ground , look sepulchral and death-like , from be so still .
He softly reclosed the door .
Having avail himself of the expire light of the candle to tie up in a handkerchief the few article of wear apparel he have , sit himself down upon a bench , to wait for morning .
With the first ray of light that struggle through the crevice in the shutter , Oliver arise , and again unbar the door .
One timid look around—one moment ’ s pause of hesitation—he have close it behind him , and be in the open street .
He look to the right and to the left , uncertain whither to fly .
He remember to have see the waggon , a they go out , toil up the hill .
He take the same route ; and arrive at a footpath across the field : which he know , after some distance , lead out again into the road ; strike into it , and walk quickly on .
Along this same footpath , Oliver well-remembered he have trot beside Mr. Bumble , when he first carry him to the workhouse from the farm .
His way lay directly in front of the cottage .
His heart beat quickly when he bethink himself of this ; and he half resolve to turn back .
He have come a long way though , and should lose a great deal of time by do so .
Besides , it be so early that there be very little fear of his be see ; so he walk on .
He reach the house .
There be no appearance of it inmate stir at that early hour .
Oliver stop , and peep into the garden .
A child be weed one of the little bed ; a he stop , he raise his pale face and disclose the feature of one of his former companion .
Oliver felt glad to see him , before he go ; for , though young than himself , he have be his little friend and playmate .
They have be beat , and starve , and shut up together , many and many a time .
“ Hush , Dick ! ” say Oliver , a the boy run to the gate , and thrust his thin arm between the rail to greet him .
“ Is any one up ? ” “ Nobody but me , ” reply the child .
“ You musn ’ t say you saw me , Dick , ” say Oliver .
“ I be run away .
They beat and ill-use me , Dick ; and I be go to seek my fortune , some long way off .
I don ’ t know where .
How pale you be ! ” “ I hear the doctor tell them I be die , ” reply the child with a faint smile .
“ I be very glad to see you , dear ; but don ’ t stop , don ’ t stop ! ” “ Yes , yes , I will , to say good-b ’ ye to you , ” reply Oliver .
“ I shall see you again , Dick .
I know I shall !
You will be well and happy ! ” “ I hope so , ” reply the child .
“ After I be dead , but not before .
I know the doctor must be right , Oliver , because I dream so much of Heaven , and Angels , and kind face that I never see when I be awake .
Kiss me , ” say the child , climb up the low gate , and fling his little arm round Oliver ’ s neck .
“ Good-b ’ ye , dear !
God bless you ! ” The blessing be from a young child ’ s lip , but it be the first that Oliver have ever hear invoke upon his head ; and through the struggle and suffering , and trouble and change , of his after life , he never once forget it .
CHAPTER VIII .
OLIVER WALKS TO LONDON .
HE ENCOUNTERS ON THE ROAD A STRANGE SORT OF YOUNG GENTLEMAN Oliver reach the stile at which the by-path terminate ; and once more gain the high-road .
It be eight o ’ clock now .
Though he be nearly five mile away from the town , he run , and hid behind the hedge , by turn , till noon : fearing that he might be pursue and overtake .
Then he sit down to rest by the side of the milestone , and begin to think , for the first time , where he have well go and try to live .
The stone by which he be seat , bore , in large character , an intimation that it be just seventy mile from that spot to London .
The name awaken a new train of idea in the boy ’ s mind .
London ! —that great place ! —nobody—not even Mr. Bumble—could ever find him there !
He have often hear the old men in the workhouse , too , say that no lad of spirit need want in London ; and that there be way of living in that vast city , which those who have be breed up in country part have no idea of .
It be the very place for a homeless boy , who must die in the street unless some one help him .
As these thing pass through his thought , he jump upon his foot , and again walked forward .
He have diminish the distance between himself and London by full four mile more , before he recollect how much he must undergo ere he could hope to reach his place of destination .
As this consideration force itself upon him , he slacken his pace a little , and meditate upon his mean of get there .
He have a crust of bread , a coarse shirt , and two pair of stocking , in his bundle .
He have a penny too—a gift of Sowerberry ’ s after some funeral in which he have acquit himself more than ordinarily well—in his pocket .
“ A clean shirt , ” think Oliver , “ be a very comfortable thing ; and so be two pair of darned stocking ; and so be a penny ; but they be small help to a sixty-five mile ’ walk in winter time. ” But Oliver ’ s thought , like those of most other people , although they be extremely ready and active to point out his difficulty , be wholly at a loss to suggest any feasible mode of surmount them ; so , after a good deal of think to no particular purpose , he change his little bundle over to the other shoulder , and trudge on .
Oliver walk twenty mile that day ; and all that time taste nothing but the crust of dry bread , and a few draught of water , which he beg at the cottage-doors by the road-side .
When the night come , he turn into a meadow ; and , creep close under a hay-rick , determine to lie there , till morning .
He felt frighten at first , for the wind moan dismally over the empty field : and he be cold and hungry , and more alone than he have ever felt before .
Being very tire with his walk , however , he soon fell asleep and forget his trouble .
He felt cold and stiff , when he get up next morning , and so hungry that he be oblige to exchange the penny for a small loaf , in the very first village through which he pass .
He have walk no more than twelve mile , when night close in again .
His foot be sore , and his leg so weak that they tremble beneath him .
Another night pass in the bleak damp air , make him bad ; when he set forward on his journey next morning he could hardly crawl along .
He wait at the bottom of a steep hill till a stage-coach come up , and then beg of the outside passenger ; but there be very few who take any notice of him : and even those tell him to wait till they get to the top of the hill , and then let them see how far he could run for a halfpenny .
Poor Oliver try to keep up with the coach a little way , but be unable to do it , by reason of his fatigue and sore foot .
When the outside saw this , they put their halfpenny back into their pocket again , declare that he be an idle young dog , and didn ’ t deserve anything ; and the coach rattle away and leave only a cloud of dust behind .
In some village , large paint board be fix up : warn all person who beg within the district , that they would be send to jail .
This frighten Oliver very much , and make him glad to get out of those village with all possible expedition .
In others , he would stand about the inn-yards , and look mournfully at every one who pass : a proceeding which generally terminate in the landlady ’ s order one of the post-boys who be lounge about , to drive that strange boy out of the place , for she be sure he have come to steal something .
If he beg at a farmer ’ s house , ten to one but they threaten to set the dog on him ; and when he show his nose in a shop , they talk about the beadle—which bring Oliver ’ s heart into his mouth , —very often the only thing he have there , for many hour together .
In fact , if it have not be for a good-hearted turnpike-man , and a benevolent old lady , Oliver ’ s trouble would have be shorten by the very same process which have put an end to his mother ’ s ; in other word , he would most assuredly have fall dead upon the king ’ s highway .
But the turnpike-man give him a meal of bread and cheese ; and the old lady , who have a shipwrecked grandson wander barefoot in some distant part of the earth , take pity upon the poor orphan , and give him what little she could afford—and more—with such kind and gentle word , and such tear of sympathy and compassion , that they sink deeper into Oliver ’ s soul , than all the suffering he have ever undergone .
Early on the seventh morning after he have leave his native place , Oliver limp slowly into the little town of Barnet .
The window-shutters be close ; the street be empty ; not a soul have awaken to the business of the day .
The sun be rise in all it splendid beauty ; but the light only serve to show the boy his own lonesomeness and desolation , a he sit , with bleeding foot and cover with dust , upon a door-step .
By degree , the shutter be open ; the window-blinds be draw up ; and people begin pass to and fro .
Some few stop to gaze at Oliver for a moment or two , or turn round to stare at him a they hurry by ; but none relieve him , or trouble themselves to inquire how he come there .
He have no heart to beg .
And there he sit .
He have be crouch on the step for some time : wondering at the great number of public-houses ( every other house in Barnet be a tavern , large or small ) , gaze listlessly at the coach a they pass through , and think how strange it seem that they could do , with ease , in a few hour , what it have take him a whole week of courage and determination beyond his year to accomplish : when he be rouse by observe that a boy , who have pass him carelessly some minute before , have return , and be now survey him most earnestly from the opposite side of the way .
He take little heed of this at first ; but the boy remain in the same attitude of close observation so long , that Oliver raise his head , and return his steady look .
Upon this , the boy cross over ; and walk close up to Oliver , say , “ Hullo , my covey !
What ’ s the row ? ” The boy who address this inquiry to the young wayfarer , be about his own age : but one of the queer look boy that Oliver have even see .
He be a snub-nosed , flat-browed , common-faced boy enough ; and a dirty a juvenile a one would wish to see ; but he have about him all the air and manner of a man .
He be short of his age : with rather bow-legs , and little , sharp , ugly eye .
His hat be stick on the top of his head so lightly , that it threaten to fall off every moment—and would have do so , very often , if the wearer have not have a knack of every now and then give his head a sudden twitch , which bring it back to it old place again .
He wear a man ’ s coat , which reach nearly to his heel .
He have turn the cuff back , half-way up his arm , to get his hand out of the sleeve : apparently with the ultimate view of thrust them into the pocket of his corduroy trouser ; for there he keep them .
He be , altogether , a roystering and swagger a young gentleman a ever stand four foot six , or something less , in the blucher .
“ Hullo , my covey !
What ’ s the row ? ” say this strange young gentleman to Oliver .
“ I be very hungry and tired , ” reply Oliver : the tear stand in his eye a he speak .
“ I have walk a long way .
I have be walk these seven days. ” “ Walking for sivin day ! ” say the young gentleman .
“ Oh , I see .
Beak ’ s order , eh ?
But , ” he add , notice Oliver ’ s look of surprise , “ I suppose you don ’ t know what a beak be , my flash com-pan-i-on. ” Oliver mildly reply , that he have always hear a bird ’ s mouth describe by the term in question .
“ My eye , how green ! ” exclaim the young gentleman .
“ Why , a beak ’ s a madgst ’ rate ; and when you walk by a beak ’ s order , it ’ s not straight forerd , but always agoing up , and niver a come down agin .
Was you never on the mill ? ” “ What mill ? ” inquire Oliver .
“ What mill !
Why , _the_ mill—the mill a take up so little room that it ’ ll work inside a Stone Jug ; and always go well when the wind ’ s low with people , than when it ’ s high ; acos then they can ’ t get workman .
But come , ” say the young gentleman ; “ you want grub , and you shall have it .
I ’ m at low-water-mark myself—only one bob and a magpie ; but , as far a it go , I ’ ll fork out and stump .
Up with you on your pin .
There !
Now then !
“ Morrice ! ” Assisting Oliver to rise , the young gentleman take him to an adjacent chandler ’ s shop , where he purchase a sufficiency of ready-dressed ham and a half-quartern loaf , or , a he himself express it , “ a fourpenny bran ! ” the ham be keep clean and preserve from dust , by the ingenious expedient of make a hole in the loaf by pull out a portion of the crumb , and stuff it therein .
Taking the bread under his arm , the young gentlman turn into a small public-house , and lead the way to a tap-room in the rear of the premise .
Here , a pot of beer be bring in , by direction of the mysterious youth ; and Oliver , fall to , at his new friend ’ s bidding , make a long and hearty meal , during the progress of which the strange boy eye him from time to time with great attention .
“ Going to London ? ” say the strange boy , when Oliver have at length conclude .
“ Yes. ” “ Got any lodging ? ” “ No. ” “ Money ? ” “ No. ” The strange boy whistle ; and put his arm into his pocket , as far a the big coat-sleeves would let them go .
“ Do you live in London ? ” inquire Oliver .
“ Yes .
I do , when I ’ m at home , ” reply the boy .
“ I suppose you want some place to sleep in to-night , don ’ t you ? ” “ I do , indeed , ” answer Oliver .
“ I have not sleep under a roof since I leave the country. ” “ Don ’ t fret your eyelid on that score , ” say the young gentleman .
“ I ’ ve get to be in London to-night ; and I know a ’ spectable old gentleman a life there , wot ’ ll give you lodging for nothink , and never ask for the change—that be , if any genelman he know interduces you .
And don ’ t he know me ?
Oh , no !
Not in the least !
By no mean .
Certainly not ! ” The young gentleman smile , a if to intimate that the latter fragment of discourse be playfully ironical ; and finish the beer a he do so .
This unexpected offer of shelter be too tempting to be resist ; especially a it be immediately follow up , by the assurance that the old gentleman refer to , would doubtless provide Oliver with a comfortable place , without loss of time .
This lead to a more friendly and confidential dialogue ; from which Oliver discover that his friend ’ s name be Jack Dawkins , and that he be a peculiar pet and protege of the elderly gentleman before mention .
Mr. Dawkin ’ s appearance do not say a vast deal in favour of the comfort which his patron ’ s interest obtain for those whom he take under his protection ; but , a he have a rather flightly and dissolute mode of conversing , and furthermore avow that among his intimate friend he be well know by the sobriquet of “ The Artful Dodger , ” Oliver conclude that , be of a dissipated and careless turn , the moral precept of his benefactor have hitherto be throw away upon him .
Under this impression , he secretly resolve to cultivate the good opinion of the old gentleman as quickly a possible ; and , if he find the Dodger incorrigible , a he more than half suspect he should , to decline the honour of his farther acquaintance .
As John Dawkins object to their entering London before nightfall , it be nearly eleven o ’ clock when they reach the turnpike at Islington .
They cross from the Angel into St. John ’ s Road ; strike down the small street which terminate at Sadler ’ s Wells Theatre ; through Exmouth Street and Coppice Row ; down the little court by the side of the workhouse ; across the classic ground which once bore the name of Hockley-in-the-Hole ; thence into Little Saffron Hill ; and so into Saffron Hill the Great : along which the Dodger scud at a rapid pace , direct Oliver to follow close at his heel .
Although Oliver have enough to occupy his attention in keep sight of his leader , he could not help bestow a few hasty glance on either side of the way , a he pass along .
A dirtier or more wretched place he have never see .
The street be very narrow and muddy , and the air be impregnate with filthy odour .
There be a good many small shop ; but the only stock in trade appear to be heap of child , who , even at that time of night , be crawl in and out at the door , or scream from the inside .
The sole place that seem to prosper amid the general blight of the place , be the public-houses ; and in them , the low order of Irish be wrangle with might and main .
Covered way and yard , which here and there diverge from the main street , disclose little knot of house , where drunken men and woman be positively wallow in filth ; and from several of the door-ways , great ill-looking fellow be cautiously emerge , bound , to all appearance , on no very well-disposed or harmless errand .
Oliver be just consider whether he hadn ’ t well run away , when they reach the bottom of the hill .
His conductor , catch him by the arm , push open the door of a house near Field Lane ; and draw him into the passage , close it behind them .
“ Now , then ! ” cry a voice from below , in reply to a whistle from the Dodger .
“ Plummy and slam ! ” be the reply .
This seem to be some watchword or signal that all be right ; for the light of a feeble candle gleam on the wall at the remote end of the passage ; and a man ’ s face peep out , from where a balustrade of the old kitchen staircase have be break away .
“ There ’ s two on you , ” say the man , thrust the candle farther out , and shield his eye with his hand .
“ Who ’ s the t ’ other one ? ” “ A new pal , ” reply Jack Dawkins , pull Oliver forward .
“ Where do he come from ? ” “ Greenland .
Is Fagin upstairs ? ” “ Yes , he ’ s a sortin ’ the wipe .
Up with you ! ” The candle be draw back , and the face disappear .
Oliver , grope his way with one hand , and have the other firmly grasp by his companion , ascend with much difficulty the dark and broken stair : which his conductor mount with an ease and expedition that show he be well acquaint with them .
He throw open the door of a back-room , and draw Oliver in after him .
The wall and ceiling of the room be perfectly black with age and dirt .
There be a deal table before the fire : upon which be a candle , stick in a ginger-beer bottle , two or three pewter pot , a loaf and butter , and a plate .
In a frying-pan , which be on the fire , and which be secure to the mantelshelf by a string , some sausage be cook ; and stand over them , with a toasting-fork in his hand , be a very old shrivel Jew , whose villainous-looking and repulsive face be obscure by a quantity of mat red hair .
He be dress in a greasy flannel gown , with his throat bare ; and seem to be divide his attention between the frying-pan and the clothes-horse , over which a great number of silk handkerchief be hang .
Several rough bed make of old sack , be huddle side by side on the floor .
Seated round the table be four or five boy , none old than the Dodger , smoke long clay pipe , and drink spirit with the air of middle-aged men .
These all crowd about their associate a he whisper a few word to the Jew ; and then turn round and grin at Oliver .
So do the Jew himself , toasting-fork in hand .
“ This be him , Fagin , ” say Jack Dawkins ; “ my friend Oliver Twist. ” The Jew grin ; and , make a low obeisance to Oliver , take him by the hand , and hop he should have the honour of his intimate acquaintance .
Upon this , the young gentleman with the pipe come round him , and shake both his hand very hard—especially the one in which he hold his little bundle .
One young gentleman be very anxious to hang up his cap for him ; and another be so obliging a to put his hand in his pocket , in order that , a he be very tired , he might not have the trouble of empty them , himself , when he go to bed .
These civility would probably be extend much far , but for a liberal exercise of the Jew ’ s toasting-fork on the head and shoulder of the affectionate youth who offer them .
“ We be very glad to see you , Oliver , very , ” say the Jew .
“ Dodger , take off the sausage ; and draw a tub near the fire for Oliver .
Ah , you ’ re a-staring at the pocket-handkerchiefs !
eh , my dear .
There be a good many of ’ em , ain ’ t there ?
We ’ ve just look ’ em out , ready for the wash ; that ’ s all , Oliver ; that ’ s all .
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” The latter part of this speech , be hail by a boisterous shout from all the hopeful pupil of the merry old gentleman .
In the midst of which they go to supper .
Oliver eat his share , and the Jew then mix him a glass of hot gin-and-water : telling him he must drink it off directly , because another gentleman want the tumbler .
Oliver do a he be desire .
Immediately afterwards he felt himself gently lift on to one of the sack ; and then he sink into a deep sleep .
CHAPTER IX .
CONTAINING FURTHER PARTICULARS CONCERNING THE PLEASANT OLD GENTLEMAN , AND HIS HOPEFUL PUPILS It be late next morning when Oliver awake , from a sound , long sleep .
There be no other person in the room but the old Jew , who be boil some coffee in a saucepan for breakfast , and whistle softly to himself a he stir it round and round , with an iron spoon .
He would stop every now and then to listen when there be the least noise below : and when he have satisfy himself , he would go on whistling and stirring again , a before .
Although Oliver have rouse himself from sleep , he be not thoroughly awake .
There be a drowsy state , between sleep and waking , when you dream more in five minute with your eye half open , and yourself half conscious of everything that be pass around you , than you would in five night with your eye fast close , and your sens wrapt in perfect unconsciousness .
At such time , a mortal know just enough of what his mind be do , to form some glimmering conception of it mighty power , it bound from earth and spurning time and space , when freed from the restraint of it corporeal associate .
Oliver be precisely in this condition .
He saw the Jew with his half-closed eye ; hear his low whistling ; and recognise the sound of the spoon grate against the saucepan ’ s side : and yet the self-same sens be mentally engage , at the same time , in busy action with almost everybody he have ever know .
When the coffee be do , the Jew draw the saucepan to the hob .
Standing , then in an irresolute attitude for a few minute , a if he do not well know how to employ himself , he turn round and look at Oliver , and call him by his name .
He do not answer , and be to all appearance asleep .
After satisfy himself upon this head , the Jew step gently to the door : which he fasten .
He then draw forth : a it seem to Oliver , from some trap in the floor : a small box , which he place carefully on the table .
His eye glisten a he raise the lid , and look in .
Dragging an old chair to the table , he sit down ; and take from it a magnificent gold watch , sparkle with jewel .
“ Aha ! ” say the Jew , shrug up his shoulder , and distort every feature with a hideous grin .
“ Clever dog !
Clever dog !
Staunch to the last !
Never tell the old parson where they be .
Never poach upon old Fagin !
And why should they ?
It wouldn ’ t have loosen the knot , or keep the drop up , a minute longer .
No , no , no !
Fine fellows !
Fine fellows ! ” With these , and other muttered reflection of the like nature , the Jew once more deposited the watch in it place of safety .
At least half a dozen more be severally draw forth from the same box , and survey with equal pleasure ; besides ring , brooch , bracelet , and other article of jewellery , of such magnificent material , and costly workmanship , that Oliver have no idea , even of their name .
Having replace these trinket , the Jew take out another : so small that it lay in the palm of his hand .
There seem to be some very minute inscription on it ; for the Jew lay it flat upon the table , and shade it with his hand , pore over it , long and earnestly .
At length he put it down , a if despairing of success ; and , lean back in his chair , mutter : “ What a fine thing capital punishment be !
Dead men never repent ; dead men never bring awkward story to light .
Ah , it ’ s a fine thing for the trade !
Five of ’ em string up in a row , and none leave to play booty , or turn white-livered ! ” As the Jew utter these word , his bright dark eye , which have be star vacantly before him , fell on Oliver ’ s face ; the boy ’ s eye be fix on his in mute curiousity ; and although the recognition be only for an instant—for the brief space of time that can possibly be conceived—it be enough to show the old man that he have be observe .
He close the lid of the box with a loud crash ; and , lay his hand on a bread knife which be on the table , start furiously up .
He tremble very much though ; for , even in his terror , Oliver could see that the knife quiver in the air .
“ What ’ s that ? ” say the Jew .
“ What do you watch me for ?
Why be you awake ?
What have you see ?
Speak out , boy !
Quick—quick !
for your life .
“ I wasn ’ t able to sleep any long , sir , ” reply Oliver , meekly .
“ I be very sorry if I have disturb you , sir. ” “ You be not awake an hour ago ? ” say the Jew , scowl fiercely on the boy .
“ No !
No , indeed ! ” reply Oliver .
“ Are you sure ? ” cry the Jew : with a still fiercer look than before : and a threatening attitude .
“ Upon my word I be not , sir , ” reply Oliver , earnestly .
“ I be not , indeed , sir. ” “ Tush , tush , my dear ! ” say the Jew , abruptly resume his old manner , and play with the knife a little , before he lay it down ; a if to induce the belief that he have catch it up , in mere sport .
“ Of course I know that , my dear .
I only try to frighten you .
You ’ re a brave boy .
Ha !
ha !
you ’ re a brave boy , Oliver. ” The Jew rub his hand with a chuckle , but glance uneasily at the box , notwithstanding .
“ Did you see any of these pretty thing , my dear ? ” say the Jew , lay his hand upon it after a short pause .
“ Yes , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ Ah ! ” say the Jew , turn rather pale .
“ They—they ’ re mine , Oliver ; my little property .
All I have to live upon , in my old age .
The folk call me a miser , my dear .
Only a miser ; that ’ s all. ” Oliver think the old gentleman must be a decided miser to live in such a dirty place , with so many watch ; but , think that perhaps his fondness for the Dodger and the other boy , cost him a good deal of money , he only cast a deferential look at the Jew , and ask if he might get up .
“ Certainly , my dear , certainly , ” reply the old gentleman .
“ Stay .
There ’ s a pitcher of water in the corner by the door .
Bring it here ; and I ’ ll give you a basin to wash in , my dear. ” Oliver get up ; walk across the room ; and stoop for an instant to raise the pitcher .
When he turn his head , the box be go .
He have scarcely wash himself , and make everything tidy , by empty the basin out of the window , agreeably to the Jew ’ s direction , when the Dodger return : accompany by a very sprightly young friend , whom Oliver have see smoke on the previous night , and who be now formally introduce to him a Charley Bates .
The four sit down , to breakfast , on the coffee , and some hot roll and ham which the Dodger have bring home in the crown of his hat .
“ Well , ” say the Jew , glance slyly at Oliver , and address himself to the Dodger , “ I hope you ’ ve be at work this morning , my dear ? ” “ Hard , ” reply the Dodger .
“ As nail , ” add Charley Bates .
“ Good boy , good boy ! ” say the Jew .
“ What have you get , Dodger ? ” “ A couple of pocket-books , ” reply that young gentlman .
“ Lined ? ” inquire the Jew , with eagerness .
“ Pretty well , ” reply the Dodger , produce two pocket-books ; one green , and the other red .
“ Not so heavy a they might be , ” say the Jew , after look at the inside carefully ; “ but very neat and nicely make .
Ingenious workman , ain ’ t he , Oliver ? ” “ Very indeed , sir , ” say Oliver .
At which Mr. Charles Bates laugh uproariously ; very much to the amazement of Oliver , who saw nothing to laugh at , in anything that have pass .
“ And what have you get , my dear ? ” say Fagin to Charley Bates .
“ Wipes , ” reply Master Bates ; at the same time produce four pocket-handkerchief .
“ Well , ” say the Jew , inspect them closely ; “ they ’ re very good one , very .
You haven ’ t mark them well , though , Charley ; so the mark shall be pick out with a needle , and we ’ ll teach Oliver how to do it .
Shall u , Oliver , eh ?
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” “ If you please , sir , ” say Oliver .
“ You ’ d like to be able to make pocket-handkerchiefs a easy a Charley Bates , wouldn ’ t you , my dear ? ” say the Jew .
“ Very much , indeed , if you ’ ll teach me , sir , ” reply Oliver .
Master Bates saw something so exquisitely ludicrous in this reply , that he burst into another laugh ; which laugh , meet the coffee he be drink , and carry it down some wrong channel , very nearly terminate in his premature suffocation .
“ He be so jolly green ! ” say Charley when he recover , a an apology to the company for his unpolite behaviour .
The Dodger say nothing , but he smooth Oliver ’ s hair over his eye , and say he ’ d know well , by and by ; upon which the old gentleman , observe Oliver ’ s colour mounting , change the subject by ask whether there have be much of a crowd at the execution that morning ?
This make him wonder more and more ; for it be plain from the reply of the two boy that they have both be there ; and Oliver naturally wonder how they could possibly have find time to be so very industrious .
When the breakfast be clear away ; the merry old gentlman and the two boy play at a very curious and uncommon game , which be perform in this way .
The merry old gentleman , place a snuff-box in one pocket of his trouser , a note-case in the other , and a watch in his waistcoat pocket , with a guard-chain round his neck , and stick a mock diamond pin in his shirt : button his coat tight round him , and put his spectacle-case and handkerchief in his pocket , trot up and down the room with a stick , in imitation of the manner in which old gentleman walk about the street any hour in the day .
Sometimes he stop at the fire-place , and sometimes at the door , make believe that he be star with all his might into shop-windows .
At such time , he would look constantly round him , for fear of thief , and would keep slap all his pocket in turn , to see that he hadn ’ t lose anything , in such a very funny and natural manner , that Oliver laugh till the tear run down his face .
All this time , the two boy follow him closely about : get out of his sight , so nimbly , every time he turn round , that it be impossible to follow their motion .
At last , the Dodger trod upon his toe , or run upon his boot accidently , while Charley Bates stumble up against him behind ; and in that one moment they take from him , with the most extraordinary rapidity , snuff-box , note-case , watch-guard , chain , shirt-pin , pocket-handkerchief , even the spectacle-case .
If the old gentlman felt a hand in any one of his pocket , he cry out where it be ; and then the game begin all over again .
When this game have be play a great many time , a couple of young lady call to see the young gentleman ; one of whom be name Bet , and the other Nancy .
They wear a good deal of hair , not very neatly turn up behind , and be rather untidy about the shoe and stocking .
They be not exactly pretty , perhaps ; but they have a great deal of colour in their face , and look quite stout and hearty .
Being remarkably free and agreeable in their manner , Oliver think them very nice girl indeed .
As there be no doubt they be .
The visitor stop a long time .
Spirits be produce , in consequence of one of the young lady complain of a coldness in her inside ; and the conversation take a very convivial and improve turn .
At length , Charley Bates express his opinion that it be time to pad the hoof .
This , it occur to Oliver , must be French for go out ; for directly afterwards , the Dodger , and Charley , and the two young lady , go away together , have be kindly furnish by the amiable old Jew with money to spend .
“ There , my dear , ” say Fagin .
“ That ’ s a pleasant life , isn ’ t it ?
They have go out for the day. ” “ Have they do work , sir ? ” inquire Oliver .
“ Yes , ” say the Jew ; “ that be , unless they should unexpectedly come across any , when they be out ; and they win ’ t neglect it , if they do , my dear , depend upon it .
Make ’ em your model , my dear .
Make ’ em your model , ” tap the fire-shovel on the hearth to add force to his word ; “ do everything they bid you , and take their advice in all matters—especially the Dodger ’ s , my dear .
He ’ ll be a great man himself , and will make you one too , if you take pattern by him.—Is my handkerchief hang out of my pocket , my dear ? ” say the Jew , stop short .
“ Yes , sir , ” say Oliver .
“ See if you can take it out , without my feeling it ; a you saw them do , when we be at play this morning. ” Oliver hold up the bottom of the pocket with one hand , a he have see the Dodger hold it , and draw the handkerchief lightly out of it with the other .
“ Is it go ? ” cry the Jew .
“ Here it be , sir , ” say Oliver , show it in his hand .
“ You ’ re a clever boy , my dear , ” say the playful old gentleman , pat Oliver on the head approvingly .
“ I never saw a sharp lad .
Here ’ s a shilling for you .
If you go on , in this way , you ’ ll be the great man of the time .
And now come here , and I ’ ll show you how to take the mark out of the handkerchiefs. ” Oliver wonder what pick the old gentleman ’ s pocket in play , have to do with his chance of be a great man .
But , think that the Jew , be so much his senior , must know best , he follow him quietly to the table , and be soon deeply involve in his new study .
CHAPTER X. OLIVER BECOMES BETTER ACQUAINTED WITH THE CHARACTERS OF HIS NEW ASSOCIATES ; AND PURCHASES EXPERIENCE AT A HIGH PRICE .
BEING A SHORT , BUT VERY IMPORTANT CHAPTER , IN THIS HISTORY For many day , Oliver remain in the Jew ’ s room , pick the mark out of the pocket-handkerchief , ( of which a great number be bring home , ) and sometimes take part in the game already describe : which the two boy and the Jew play , regularly , every morning .
At length , he begin to languish for fresh air , and take many occasion of earnestly entreat the old gentleman to allow him to go out to work with his two companion .
Oliver be render the more anxious to be actively employ , by what he have see of the stern morality of the old gentleman ’ s character .
Whenever the Dodger or Charley Bates come home at night , empty-handed , he would expatiate with great vehemence on the misery of idle and lazy habit ; and would enforce upon them the necessity of an active life , by send them supperless to bed .
On one occasion , indeed , he even go so far a to knock them both down a flight of stair ; but this be carry out his virtuous precept to an unusual extent .
At length , one morning , Oliver obtain the permission he have so eagerly seek .
There have be no handkerchiefs to work upon , for two or three day , and the dinner have be rather meagre .
Perhaps these be reason for the old gentleman ’ s give his assent ; but , whether they be or no , he tell Oliver he might go , and place him under the joint guardianship of Charley Bates , and his friend the Dodger .
The three boy sallied out ; the Dodger with his coat-sleeves tuck up , and his hat cock , a usual ; Master Bates saunter along with his hand in his pocket ; and Oliver between them , wonder where they be go , and what branch of manufacture he would be instruct in , first .
The pace at which they go , be such a very lazy , ill-looking saunter , that Oliver soon begin to think his companion be go to deceive the old gentleman , by not go to work at all .
The Dodger have a vicious propensity , too , of pull the cap from the head of small boy and toss them down area ; while Charley Bates exhibit some very loose notion concern the right of property , by pilfer diver apple and onion from the stall at the kennel side , and thrust them into pocket which be so surprisingly capacious , that they seem to undermine his whole suit of clothes in every direction .
These thing look so bad , that Oliver be on the point of declare his intention of seek his way back , in the best way he could ; when his thought be suddenly direct into another channel , by a very mysterious change of behaviour on the part of the Dodger .
They be just emerge from a narrow court not far from the open square in Clerkenwell , which be yet call , by some strange perversion of term , “ The Green ” : when the Dodger make a sudden stop ; and , lay his finger on his lip , draw his companion back again , with the great caution and circumspection .
“ What ’ s the matter ? ” demand Oliver .
“ Hush ! ” reply the Dodger .
“ Do you see that old cove at the book-stall ? ” “ The old gentleman over the way ? ” say Oliver .
“ Yes , I see him. ” “ He ’ ll do , ” say the Dodger .
“ A prime plant , ” observe Master Charley Bates .
Oliver look from one to the other , with the great surprise ; but he be not permit to make any inquiry ; for the two boy walk stealthily across the road , and slunk close behind the old gentleman towards whom his attention have be direct .
Oliver walk a few pace after them ; and , not know whether to advance or retire , stand look on in silent amazement .
The old gentleman be a very respectable-looking personage , with a powdered head and gold spectacle .
He be dress in a bottle-green coat with a black velvet collar ; wore white trouser ; and carry a smart bamboo cane under his arm .
He have take up a book from the stall , and there he stand , read away , as hard a if he be in his elbow-chair , in his own study .
It be very possible that he fancy himself there , indeed ; for it be plain , from his abstraction , that he saw not the book-stall , nor the street , nor the boy , nor , in short , anything but the book itself : which he be read straight through : turning over the leaf when he get to the bottom of a page , begin at the top line of the next one , and go regularly on , with the great interest and eagerness .
What be Oliver ’ s horror and alarm a he stand a few pace off , look on with his eyelid a wide open a they would possibly go , to see the Dodger plunge his hand into the old gentleman ’ s pocket , and draw from thence a handkerchief !
To see him hand the same to Charley Bates ; and finally to behold them , both run away round the corner at full speed !
In an instant the whole mystery of the hankerchiefs , and the watch , and the jewel , and the Jew , rush upon the boy ’ s mind .
He stand , for a moment , with the blood so tingle through all his vein from terror , that he felt a if he be in a burning fire ; then , confuse and frighten , he take to his heel ; and , not know what he do , make off as fast a he could lay his foot to the ground .
This be all do in a minute ’ s space .
In the very instant when Oliver begin to run , the old gentleman , put his hand to his pocket , and miss his handkerchief , turn sharp round .
Seeing the boy scud away at such a rapid pace , he very naturally conclude him to be the depredator ; and shout “ Stop thief ! ” with all his might , make off after him , book in hand .
But the old gentleman be not the only person who raise the hue-and-cry .
The Dodger and Master Bates , unwilling to attract public attention by run down the open street , have merely retire into the very first doorway round the corner .
They no sooner hear the cry , and saw Oliver run , than , guess exactly how the matter stand , they issue forth with great promptitude ; and , shout “ Stop thief ! ” too , join in the pursuit like good citizen .
Although Oliver have be bring up by philosopher , he be not theoretically acquaint with the beautiful axiom that self-preservation be the first law of nature .
If he have be , perhaps he would have be prepare for this .
Not be prepare , however , it alarm him the more ; so away he go like the wind , with the old gentleman and the two boy roar and shout behind him .
“ Stop thief !
Stop thief ! ” There be a magic in the sound .
The tradesman leave his counter , and the car-man his waggon ; the butcher throw down his tray ; the baker his basket ; the milkman his pail ; the errand-boy his parcel ; the school-boy his marble ; the paviour his pickaxe ; the child his battledore .
Away they run , pell-mell , helter-skelter , slap-dash : tearing , yelling , scream , knock down the passenger a they turn the corner , rouse up the dog , and astonish the fowl : and street , square , and court , re-echo with the sound .
“ Stop thief !
Stop thief ! ” The cry be take up by a hundred voice , and the crowd accumulate at every turning .
Away they fly , splash through the mud , and rattle along the pavement : up go the window , out run the people , onward bear the mob , a whole audience desert Punch in the very thick of the plot , and , join the rushing throng , swell the shout , and lend fresh vigour to the cry , “ Stop thief !
Stop thief ! ” “ Stop thief !
Stop thief ! ” There be a passion FOR _hunting_ _something_ deeply implant in the human breast .
One wretched breathless child , pant with exhaustion ; terror in his look ; agony in his eye ; large drop of perspiration stream down his face ; strain every nerve to make head upon his pursuer ; and a they follow on his track , and gain upon him every instant , they hail his decreasing strength with joy .
“ Stop thief ! ” Ay , stop him for God ’ s sake , be it only in mercy !
Stopped at last !
A clever blow .
He be down upon the pavement ; and the crowd eagerly gather round him : each new comer , jostling and struggle with the others to catch a glimpse .
“ Stand aside ! ” “ Give him a little air ! ” “ Nonsense !
he don ’ t deserve it. ” “ Where ’ s the gentleman ? ” “ Here his be , come down the street. ” “ Make room there for the gentleman ! ” “ Is this the boy , sir ! ” “ Yes. ” Oliver lay , cover with mud and dust , and bleed from the mouth , look wildly round upon the heap of face that surround him , when the old gentleman be officiously drag and push into the circle by the foremost of the pursuer .
“ Yes , ” say the gentleman , “ I be afraid it be the boy. ” “ Afraid ! ” murmur the crowd .
“ That ’ s a good ’ un ! ” “ Poor fellow ! ” say the gentleman , “ he have hurt himself. ” “ _I_ do that , sir , ” say a great lubberly fellow , step forward ; “ and preciously I cut my knuckle agin ’ his mouth .
I stop him , sir. ” The fellow touch his hat with a grin , expect something for his pain ; but , the old gentleman , eye him with an expression of dislike , look anxiously round , a if he contemplate run away himself : which it be very possible he might have attempt to do , and thus have afford another chase , have not a police officer ( who be generally the last person to arrive in such case ) at that moment make his way through the crowd , and seize Oliver by the collar .
“ Come , get up , ” say the man , roughly .
“ It wasn ’ t me indeed , sir .
Indeed , indeed , it be two other boy , ” say Oliver , clasp his hand passionately , and look round .
“ They be here somewhere. ” “ Oh no , they ain ’ t , ” say the officer .
He mean this to be ironical , but it be true besides ; for the Dodger and Charley Bates have file off down the first convenient court they come to .
“ Come , get up ! ” “ Don ’ t hurt him , ” say the old gentleman , compassionately .
“ Oh no , I win ’ t hurt him , ” reply the officer , tear his jacket half off his back , in proof thereof .
“ Come , I know you ; it win ’ t do .
Will you stand upon your leg , you young devil ? ” Oliver , who could hardly stand , make a shift to raise himself on his foot , and be at once lug along the street by the jacket-collar , at a rapid pace .
The gentleman walk on with them by the officer ’ s side ; and a many of the crowd a could achieve the feat , get a little ahead , and star back at Oliver from time to time .
The boy shout in triumph ; and on they go .
CHAPTER XI .
TREATS OF MR. FANG THE POLICE MAGISTRATE ; AND FURNISHES A SLIGHT SPECIMEN OF HIS MODE OF ADMINISTERING JUSTICE The offence have be commit within the district , and indeed in the immediate neighborhood of , a very notorious metropolitan police office .
The crowd have only the satisfaction of accompany Oliver through two or three street , and down a place call Mutton Hill , when he be lead beneath a low archway , and up a dirty court , into this dispensary of summary justice , by the back way .
It be a small paved yard into which they turn ; and here they encounter a stout man with a bunch of whisker on his face , and a bunch of key in his hand .
“ What ’ s the matter now ? ” say the man carelessly .
“ A young fogle-hunter , ” reply the man who have Oliver in charge .
“ Are you the party that ’ s be rob , sir ? ” inquire the man with the key .
“ Yes , I be , ” reply the old gentleman ; “ but I be not sure that this boy actually take the handkerchief .
I—I would rather not press the case. ” “ Must go before the magistrate now , sir , ” reply the man .
“ His worship will be disengage in half a minute .
Now , young gallows ! ” This be an invitation for Oliver to enter through a door which he unlock a he speak , and which lead into a stone cell .
Here he be search ; and nothing be find upon him , lock up .
This cell be in shape and size something like an area cellar , only not so light .
It be most intolerably dirty ; for it be Monday morning ; and it have be tenant by six drunken people , who have be lock up , elsewhere , since Saturday night .
But this be little .
In our station-houses , men and woman be every night confine on the most trivial charges—the word be worth noting—in dungeon , compare with which , those in Newgate , occupy by the most atrocious felon , try , find guilty , and under sentence of death , be palace .
Let any one who doubt this , compare the two .
The old gentleman look almost as rueful a Oliver when the key grate in the lock .
He turn with a sigh to the book , which have be the innocent cause of all this disturbance .
“ There be something in that boy ’ s face , ” say the old gentleman to himself a he walk slowly away , tap his chin with the cover of the book , in a thoughtful manner ; “ something that touch and interest me .
_Can_ he be innocent ?
He look like—Bye the bye , ” exclaim the old gentleman , halt very abruptly , and star up into the sky , “ Bless my soul ! —where have I see something like that look before ? ” After muse for some minute , the old gentleman walk , with the same meditative face , into a back anteroom opening from the yard ; and there , retire into a corner , call up before his mind ’ s eye a vast amphitheatre of face over which a dusky curtain have hang for many year .
“ No , ” say the old gentleman , shake his head ; “ it must be imagination. ” He wander over them again .
He have call them into view , and it be not easy to replace the shroud that have so long conceal them .
There be the face of friend , and foe , and of many that have be almost stranger peer intrusively from the crowd ; there be the face of young and blooming girl that be now old woman ; there be face that the grave have change and close upon , but which the mind , superior to it power , still dress in their old freshness and beauty , call back the lustre of the eye , the brightness of the smile , the beaming of the soul through it mask of clay , and whispering of beauty beyond the tomb , change but to be heighten , and take from earth only to be set up a a light , to shed a soft and gentle glow upon the path to Heaven .
But the old gentleman could recall no one countenance of which Oliver ’ s feature bore a trace .
So , he heave a sigh over the recollection he awaken ; and be , happily for himself , an absent old gentleman , bury them again in the page of the musty book .
He be rouse by a touch on the shoulder , and a request from the man with the key to follow him into the office .
He close his book hastily ; and be at once usher into the impose presence of the renowned Mr. Fang .
The office be a front parlour , with a panelled wall .
Mr. Fang sit behind a bar , at the upper end ; and on one side the door be a sort of wooden pen in which poor little Oliver be already deposit ; tremble very much at the awfulness of the scene .
Mr. Fang be a lean , long-backed , stiff-necked , middle-sized man , with no great quantity of hair , and what he have , grow on the back and side of his head .
His face be stern , and much flush .
If he be really not in the habit of drink rather more than be exactly good for him , he might have bring action against his countenance for libel , and have recover heavy damage .
The old gentleman bow respectfully ; and advance to the magistrate ’ s desk , say , suit the action to the word , “ That be my name and address , sir. ” He then withdraw a pace or two ; and , with another polite and gentlemanly inclination of the head , wait to be question .
Now , it so happen that Mr. Fang be at that moment peruse a leading article in a newspaper of the morning , advert to some recent decision of his , and commend him , for the three hundred and fiftieth time , to the special and particular notice of the Secretary of State for the Home Department .
He be out of temper ; and he look up with an angry scowl .
“ Who be you ? ” say Mr. Fang .
The old gentleman point , with some surprise , to his card .
“ Officer ! ” say Mr. Fang , toss the card contemptuously away with the newspaper .
“ Who be this fellow ? ” “ My name , sir , ” say the old gentleman , speak _like_ a gentleman , “ my name , sir , be Brownlow .
Permit me to inquire the name of the magistrate who offer a gratuitous and unprovoked insult to a respectable person , under the protection of the bench. ” Saying this , Mr. Brownlow look around the office a if in search of some person who would afford him the required information .
“ Officer ! ” say Mr. Fang , throw the paper on one side , “ what ’ s this fellow charge with ? ” “ He ’ s not charge at all , your worship , ” reply the officer .
“ He appear against this boy , your worship. ” His worship know this perfectly well ; but it be a good annoyance , and a safe one .
“ Appears against the boy , do he ? ” say Mr. Fang , survey Mr. Brownlow contemptuously from head to foot .
“ Swear him ! ” “ Before I be sworn , I must beg to say one word , ” say Mr. Brownlow ; “ and that be , that I really never , without actual experience , could have believed— ” “ Hold your tongue , sir ! ” say Mr. Fang , peremptorily .
“ I will not , sir ! ” reply the old gentleman .
“ Hold your tongue this instant , or I ’ ll have you turn out of the office ! ” say Mr. Fang .
“ You ’ re an insolent impertinent fellow .
How dare you bully a magistrate ! ” “ What ! ” exclaim the old gentleman , redden .
“ Swear this person ! ” say Fang to the clerk .
“ I ’ ll not hear another word .
Swear him. ” Mr. Brownlow ’ s indignation be greatly rouse ; but reflect perhaps , that he might only injure the boy by give vent to it , he suppress his feeling and submit to be swear at once .
“ Now , ” say Fang , “ what ’ s the charge against this boy ?
What have you get to say , sir ? ” “ I be stand at a bookstall— ” Mr. Brownlow begin .
“ Hold your tongue , sir , ” say Mr. Fang .
“ Policeman !
Where ’ s the policeman ?
Here , swear this policeman .
Now , policeman , what be this ? ” The policeman , with become humility , related how he have take the charge ; how he have search Oliver , and find nothing on his person ; and how that be all he know about it .
“ Are there any witness ? ” inquire Mr. Fang .
“ None , your worship , ” reply the policeman .
Mr. Fang sit silent for some minute , and then , turn round to the prosecutor , say in a towering passion .
“ Do you mean to state what your complaint against this boy be , man , or do you not ?
You have be swear .
Now , if you stand there , refuse to give evidence , I ’ ll punish you for disrespect to the bench ; I will , by— ” By what , or by whom , nobody know , for the clerk and jailor cough very loud , just at the right moment ; and the former drop a heavy book upon the floor , thus prevent the word from be heard—accidently , of course .
With many interruption , and repeat insult , Mr. Brownlow contrive to state his case ; observe that , in the surprise of the moment , he have run after the boy because he have saw him run away ; and express his hope that , if the magistrate should believe him , although not actually the thief , to be connect with the thief , he would deal a leniently with him a justice would allow .
“ He have be hurt already , ” say the old gentleman in conclusion .
“ And I fear , ” he add , with great energy , look towards the bar , “ I really fear that he be ill. ” “ Oh !
yes , I dare say ! ” say Mr. Fang , with a sneer .
“ Come , none of your trick here , you young vagabond ; they win ’ t do .
What ’ s your name ? ” Oliver try to reply but his tongue fail him .
He be deadly pale ; and the whole place seem turn round and round .
“ What ’ s your name , you harden scoundrel ? ” demand Mr. Fang .
“ Officer , what ’ s his name ? ” This be address to a bluff old fellow , in a striped waistcoat , who be stand by the bar .
He bend over Oliver , and repeat the inquiry ; but find him really incapable of understand the question ; and know that his not reply would only infuriate the magistrate the more , and add to the severity of his sentence ; he hazard a guess .
“ He say his name ’ s Tom White , your worship , ” say the kind-hearted thief-taker .
“ Oh , he win ’ t speak out , win ’ t he ? ” say Fang .
“ Very well , very well .
Where do he live ? ” “ Where he can , your worship , ” reply the officer ; again pretend to receive Oliver ’ s answer .
“ Has he any parent ? ” inquire Mr. Fang .
“ He say they die in his infancy , your worship , ” reply the officer : hazard the usual reply .
At this point of the inquiry , Oliver raise his head ; and , look round with implore eye , murmur a feeble prayer for a draught of water .
“ Stuff and nonsense ! ” say Mr. Fang : “ don ’ t try to make a fool of me. ” “ I think he really be ill , your worship , ” remonstrate the officer .
“ I know well , ” say Mr. Fang .
“ Take care of him , officer , ” say the old gentleman , raise his hand instinctively ; “ he ’ ll fall down. ” “ Stand away , officer , ” cry Fang ; “ let him , if he likes. ” Oliver avail himself of the kind permission , and fell to the floor in a fainting fit .
The men in the office look at each other , but no one dare to stir .
“ I know he be sham , ” say Fang , a if this be incontestable proof of the fact .
“ Let him lie there ; he ’ ll soon be tire of that. ” “ How do you propose to deal with the case , sir ? ” inquire the clerk in a low voice .
“ Summarily , ” reply Mr. Fang .
“ He stand committed for three months—hard labour of course .
Clear the office. ” The door be open for this purpose , and a couple of men be prepare to carry the insensible boy to his cell ; when an elderly man of decent but poor appearance , clad in an old suit of black , rushed hastily into the office , and advance towards the bench .
“ Stop , stop !
don ’ t take him away !
For Heaven ’ s sake stop a moment ! ” cry the new comer , breathless with haste .
Although the preside Genii in such an office a this , exercise a summary and arbitrary power over the liberty , the good name , the character , almost the life , of Her Majesty ’ s subject , especially of the poorer class ; and although , within such wall , enough fantastic trick be daily play to make the angel blind with weep ; they be close to the public , save through the medium of the daily press .
[ Footnote : Or be virtually , then . ]
Mr. Fang be consequently not a little indignant to see an unbidden guest enter in such irreverent disorder .
“ What be this ?
Who be this ?
Turn this man out .
Clear the office ! ” cry Mr. Fang .
“ I _will_ speak , ” cry the man ; “ I will not be turn out .
I saw it all .
I keep the book-stall .
I demand to be swear .
I will not be put down .
Mr. Fang , you must hear me .
You must not refuse , sir. ” The man be right .
His manner be determine ; and the matter be grow rather too serious to be hush up .
“ Swear the man , ” growl Mr. Fang , with a very ill grace .
“ Now , man , what have you get to say ? ” “ This , ” say the man : “ I saw three boy : two others and the prisoner here : loitering on the opposite side of the way , when this gentleman be read .
The robbery be commit by another boy .
I saw it do ; and I saw that this boy be perfectly amaze and stupified by it. ” Having by this time recover a little breath , the worthy book-stall keeper proceed to relate , in a more coherent manner the exact circumstance of the robbery .
“ Why didn ’ t you come here before ? ” say Fang , after a pause .
“ I hadn ’ t a soul to mind the shop , ” reply the man .
“ Everybody who could have help me , have join in the pursuit .
I could get nobody till five minute ago ; and I ’ ve run here all the way. ” “ The prosecutor be read , be he ? ” inquire Fang , after another pause .
“ Yes , ” reply the man .
“ The very book he have in his hand. ” “ Oh , that book , eh ? ” say Fang .
“ Is it pay for ? ” “ No , it be not , ” reply the man , with a smile .
“ Dear me , I forget all about it ! ” exclaim the absent old gentleman , innocently .
“ A nice person to prefer a charge against a poor boy ! ” say Fang , with a comical effort to look humane .
“ I consider , sir , that you have obtain possession of that book , under very suspicious and disreputable circumstance ; and you may think yourself very fortunate that the owner of the property decline to prosecute .
Let this be a lesson to you , my man , or the law will overtake you yet .
The boy be discharge .
Clear the office ! ” “ D—n me ! ” cry the old gentleman , burst out with the rage he have keep down so long , “ d—n me !
I ’ ll— ” “ Clear the office ! ” say the magistrate .
“ Officers , do you hear ?
Clear the office ! ” The mandate be obey ; and the indignant Mr. Brownlow be convey out , with the book in one hand , and the bamboo cane in the other : in a perfect phrenzy of rage and defiance .
He reach the yard ; and his passion vanish in a moment .
Little Oliver Twist lay on his back on the pavement , with his shirt unbutton , and his temple bath with water ; his face a deadly white ; and a cold tremble convulse his whole frame .
“ Poor boy , poor boy ! ” say Mr. Brownlow , bend over him .
“ Call a coach , somebody , pray .
Directly ! ” A coach be obtain , and Oliver have be carefully lay on the seat , the old gentleman get in and sit himself on the other .
“ May I accompany you ? ” say the book-stall keeper , look in .
“ Bless me , yes , my dear sir , ” say Mr. Brownlow quickly .
“ I forget you .
Dear , dear !
I have this unhappy book still !
Jump in .
Poor fellow !
There ’ s no time to lose. ” The book-stall keeper get into the coach ; and away they drive .
CHAPTER XII .
IN WHICH OLIVER IS TAKEN BETTER CARE OF THAN HE EVER WAS BEFORE .
AND IN WHICH THE NARRATIVE REVERTS TO THE MERRY OLD GENTLEMAN AND HIS YOUTHFUL FRIENDS .
The coach rattle away , over nearly the same ground a that which Oliver have traverse when he first enter London in company with the Dodger ; and , turn a different way when it reach the Angel at Islington , stop at length before a neat house , in a quiet shady street near Pentonville .
Here , a bed be prepare , without loss of time , in which Mr. Brownlow saw his young charge carefully and comfortably deposit ; and here , he be tend with a kindness and solicitude that know no bound .
But , for many day , Oliver remain insensible to all the goodness of his new friend .
The sun rise and sink , and rise and sink again , and many time after that ; and still the boy lay stretch on his uneasy bed , dwindle away beneath the dry and waste heat of fever .
The worm do not work more surely on the dead body , than do this slow creeping fire upon the living frame .
Weak , and thin , and pallid , he awake at last from what seem to have be a long and troubled dream .
Feebly raise himself in the bed , with his head rest on his trembling arm , he look anxiously around .
“ What room be this ?
Where have I be bring to ? ” say Oliver .
“ This be not the place I go to sleep in. ” He utter these word in a feeble voice , be very faint and weak ; but they be overhear at once .
The curtain at the bed ’ s head be hastily draw back , and a motherly old lady , very neatly and precisely dress , rise a she undrew it , from an arm-chair close by , in which she have be sit at needle-work .
“ Hush , my dear , ” say the old lady softly .
“ You must be very quiet , or you will be ill again ; and you have be very bad , —as bad a bad could be , pretty nigh .
Lie down again ; there ’ s a dear ! ” With those word , the old lady very gently place Oliver ’ s head upon the pillow ; and , smooth back his hair from his forehead , look so kindly and love in his face , that he could not help place his little withered hand in hers , and draw it round his neck .
“ Save u ! ” say the old lady , with tear in her eye .
“ What a grateful little dear it be .
Pretty creetur !
What would his mother feel if she have sit by him a I have , and could see him now ! ” “ Perhaps she do see me , ” whisper Oliver , fold his hand together ; “ perhaps she have sit by me .
I almost feel a if she had. ” “ That be the fever , my dear , ” say the old lady mildly .
“ I suppose it be , ” reply Oliver , “ because heaven be a long way off ; and they be too happy there , to come down to the bedside of a poor boy .
But if she know I be ill , she must have pity me , even there ; for she be very ill herself before she die .
She can ’ t know anything about me though , ” add Oliver after a moment ’ s silence .
“ If she have see me hurt , it would have make her sorrowful ; and her face have always look sweet and happy , when I have dream of her. ” The old lady make no reply to this ; but wipe her eye first , and her spectacle , which lay on the counterpane , afterwards , a if they be part and parcel of those feature , bring some cool stuff for Oliver to drink ; and then , pat him on the cheek , tell him he must lie very quiet , or he would be ill again .
So , Oliver keep very still ; partly because he be anxious to obey the kind old lady in all thing ; and partly , to tell the truth , because he be completely exhaust with what he have already say .
He soon fell into a gentle doze , from which he be awaken by the light of a candle : which , be bring near the bed , show him a gentleman with a very large and loud-ticking gold watch in his hand , who felt his pulse , and say he be a great deal well .
“ You _are_ a great deal well , be you not , my dear ? ” say the gentleman .
“ Yes , thank you , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ Yes , I know you be , ” say the gentleman : “ You ’ re hungry too , an ’ t you ? ” “ No , sir , ” answer Oliver .
“ Hem ! ” say the gentleman .
“ No , I know you ’ re not .
He be not hungry , Mrs. Bedwin , ” say the gentleman : look very wise .
The old lady make a respectful inclination of the head , which seem to say that she think the doctor be a very clever man .
The doctor appear much of the same opinion himself .
“ You feel sleepy , don ’ t you , my dear ? ” say the doctor .
“ No , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ No , ” say the doctor , with a very shrewd and satisfied look .
“ You ’ re not sleepy .
Nor thirsty .
Are you ? ” “ Yes , sir , rather thirsty , ” answer Oliver .
“ Just a I expect , Mrs. Bedwin , ” say the doctor .
“ It ’ s very natural that he should be thirsty .
You may give him a little tea , ma ’ be , and some dry toast without any butter .
Don ’ t keep him too warm , ma ’ be ; but be careful that you don ’ t let him be too cold ; will you have the goodness ? ” The old lady drop a curtsey .
The doctor , after taste the cool stuff , and express a qualified approval of it , hurry away : his boot creak in a very important and wealthy manner a he go downstairs .
Oliver doze off again , soon after this ; when he awake , it be nearly twelve o ’ clock .
The old lady tenderly bid him good-night shortly afterwards , and leave him in charge of a fat old woman who have just come : bringing with her , in a little bundle , a small Prayer Book and a large nightcap .
Putting the latter on her head and the former on the table , the old woman , after tell Oliver that she have come to sit up with him , draw her chair close to the fire and go off into a series of short nap , chequer at frequent interval with sundry tumbling forward , and diver moan and choking .
These , however , have no bad effect than cause her to rub her nose very hard , and then fall asleep again .
And thus the night crept slowly on .
Oliver lay awake for some time , count the little circle of light which the reflection of the rushlight-shade threw upon the ceiling ; or trace with his languid eye the intricate pattern of the paper on the wall .
The darkness and the deep stillness of the room be very solemn ; a they bring into the boy ’ s mind the thought that death have be hover there , for many day and night , and might yet fill it with the gloom and dread of his awful presence , he turn his face upon the pillow , and fervently pray to Heaven .
Gradually , he fell into that deep tranquil sleep which ease from recent suffer alone imparts ; that calm and peaceful rest which it be pain to wake from .
Who , if this be death , would be rouse again to all the struggle and turmoil of life ; to all it care for the present ; it anxiety for the future ; more than all , it weary recollection of the past !
It have be bright day , for hour , when Oliver open his eye ; he felt cheerful and happy .
The crisis of the disease be safely past .
He belong to the world again .
In three day ’ time he be able to sit in an easy-chair , well prop up with pillow ; and , a he be still too weak to walk , Mrs. Bedwin have him carried downstairs into the little housekeeper ’ s room , which belong to her .
Having him set , here , by the fire-side , the good old lady sit herself down too ; and , be in a state of considerable delight at see him so much good , forthwith begin to cry most violently .
“ Never mind me , my dear , ” say the old lady ; “ I ’ m only have a regular good cry .
There ; it ’ s all over now ; and I ’ m quite comfortable. ” “ You ’ re very , very kind to me , ma ’ be , ” say Oliver .
“ Well , never you mind that , my dear , ” say the old lady ; “ that ’ s get nothing to do with your broth ; and it ’ s full time you have it ; for the doctor say Mr. Brownlow may come in to see you this morning ; and we must get up our best look , because the good we look , the more he ’ ll be pleased. ” And with this , the old lady apply herself to warm up , in a little saucepan , a basin full of broth : strong enough , Oliver think , to furnish an ample dinner , when reduce to the regulation strength , for three hundred and fifty pauper , at the low computation .
“ Are you fond of picture , dear ? ” inquire the old lady , see that Oliver have fix his eye , most intently , on a portrait which hung against the wall ; just opposite his chair .
“ I don ’ t quite know , ma ’ be , ” say Oliver , without take his eye from the canvas ; “ I have see so few that I hardly know .
What a beautiful , mild face that lady ’ s be ! ” “ Ah ! ” say the old lady , “ painter always make lady out pretty than they be , or they wouldn ’ t get any custom , child .
The man that invent the machine for take likeness might have know that would never succeed ; it ’ s a deal too honest .
A deal , ” say the old lady , laugh very heartily at her own acuteness .
“ Is—is that a likeness , ma ’ be ? ” say Oliver .
“ Yes , ” say the old lady , look up for a moment from the broth ; “ that ’ s a portrait. ” “ Whose , ma ’ be ? ” ask Oliver .
“ Why , really , my dear , I don ’ t know , ” answer the old lady in a good-humoured manner .
“ It ’ s not a likeness of anybody that you or I know , I expect .
It seem to strike your fancy , dear. ” “ It be so pretty , ” reply Oliver .
“ Why , sure you ’ re not afraid of it ? ” say the old lady : observing in great surprise , the look of awe with which the child regard the painting .
“ Oh no , no , ” return Oliver quickly ; “ but the eye look so sorrowful ; and where I sit , they seem fix upon me .
It make my heart beat , ” add Oliver in a low voice , “ a if it be alive , and want to speak to me , but couldn ’ t. ” “ Lord save u ! ” exclaim the old lady , start ; “ don ’ t talk in that way , child .
You ’ re weak and nervous after your illness .
Let me wheel your chair round to the other side ; and then you win ’ t see it .
There ! ” say the old lady , suit the action to the word ; “ you don ’ t see it now , at all events. ” Oliver _did_ see it in his mind ’ s eye as distinctly a if he have not alter his position ; but he think it well not to worry the kind old lady ; so he smile gently when she look at him ; and Mrs. Bedwin , satisfy that he felt more comfortable , salt and break bit of toasted bread into the broth , with all the bustle befitting so solemn a preparation .
Oliver get through it with extraordinary expedition .
He have scarcely swallow the last spoonful , when there come a soft rap at the door .
“ Come in , ” say the old lady ; and in walked Mr. Brownlow .
Now , the old gentleman come in as brisk a need be ; but , he have no sooner raise his spectacle on his forehead , and thrust his hand behind the skirt of his dressing-gown to take a good long look at Oliver , than his countenance underwent a very great variety of odd contortion .
Oliver look very worn and shadowy from sickness , and make an ineffectual attempt to stand up , out of respect to his benefactor , which terminate in his sinking back into the chair again ; and the fact be , if the truth must be tell , that Mr. Brownlow ’ s heart , be large enough for any six ordinary old gentleman of humane disposition , force a supply of tear into his eye , by some hydraulic process which we be not sufficiently philosophical to be in a condition to explain .
“ Poor boy , poor boy ! ” say Mr. Brownlow , clear his throat .
“ I ’ m rather hoarse this morning , Mrs. Bedwin .
I ’ m afraid I have catch cold. ” “ I hope not , sir , ” say Mrs. Bedwin .
“ Everything you have have , have be well air , sir. ” “ I don ’ t know , Bedwin .
I don ’ t know , ” say Mr. Brownlow ; “ I rather think I have a damp napkin at dinner-time yesterday ; but never mind that .
How do you feel , my dear ? ” “ Very happy , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ And very grateful indeed , sir , for your goodness to me. ” “ Good by , ” say Mr. Brownlow , stoutly .
“ Have you give him any nourishment , Bedwin ?
Any slop , eh ? ” “ He have just have a basin of beautiful strong broth , sir , ” reply Mrs. Bedwin : draw herself up slightly , and lay strong emphasis on the last word : to intimate that between slop , and broth will compound , there exist no affinity or connection whatsoever .
“ Ugh ! ” say Mr. Brownlow , with a slight shudder ; “ a couple of glass of port wine would have do him a great deal more good .
Wouldn ’ t they , Tom White , eh ? ” “ My name be Oliver , sir , ” reply the little invalid : with a look of great astonishment .
“ Oliver , ” say Mr. Brownlow ; “ Oliver what ?
Oliver White , eh ? ” “ No , sir , Twist , Oliver Twist. ” “ Queer name ! ” say the old gentleman .
“ What make you tell the magistrate your name be White ? ” “ I never tell him so , sir , ” return Oliver in amazement .
This sound so like a falsehood , that the old gentleman look somewhat sternly in Oliver ’ s face .
It be impossible to doubt him ; there be truth in every one of it thin and sharpened lineament .
“ Some mistake , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
But , although his motive for look steadily at Oliver no longer exist , the old idea of the resemblance between his feature and some familiar face come upon him so strongly , that he could not withdraw his gaze .
“ I hope you be not angry with me , sir ? ” say Oliver , raise his eye beseechingly .
“ No , no , ” reply the old gentleman .
“ Why !
what ’ s this ?
Bedwin , look there ! ” As he speak , he point hastily to the picture over Oliver ’ s head , and then to the boy ’ s face .
There be it living copy .
The eye , the head , the mouth ; every feature be the same .
The expression be , for the instant , so precisely alike , that the minute line seem copied with startle accuracy !
Oliver know not the cause of this sudden exclamation ; for , not be strong enough to bear the start it give him , he faint away .
A weakness on his part , which afford the narrative an opportunity of relieve the reader from suspense , in behalf of the two young pupil of the Merry Old Gentleman ; and of recording— That when the Dodger , and his accomplished friend Master Bates , join in the hue-and-cry which be raise at Oliver ’ s heel , in consequence of their execute an illegal conveyance of Mr. Brownlow ’ s personal property , a have be already describe , they be actuate by a very laudable and become regard for themselves ; and forasmuch a the freedom of the subject and the liberty of the individual be among the first and proud boast of a true-hearted Englishman , so , I need hardly beg the reader to observe , that this action should tend to exalt them in the opinion of all public and patriotic men , in almost a great a degree a this strong proof of their anxiety for their own preservation and safety go to corroborate and confirm the little code of law which certain profound and sound-judging philosopher have lay down a the main-springs of all Nature ’ s deed and action : the say philosopher very wisely reduce the good lady ’ s proceeding to matter of maxim and theory : and , by a very neat and pretty compliment to her exalted wisdom and understanding , put entirely out of sight any consideration of heart , or generous impulse and feeling .
For , these be matter totally beneath a female who be acknowledge by universal admission to be far above the numerous little foible and weakness of her sex .
If I want any further proof of the strictly philosophical nature of the conduct of these young gentleman in their very delicate predicament , I should at once find it in the fact ( also record in a foregoing part of this narrative ) , of their quit the pursuit , when the general attention be fix upon Oliver ; and make immediately for their home by the short possible cut .
Although I do not mean to assert that it be usually the practice of renowned and learned sage , to shorten the road to any great conclusion ( their course indeed be rather to lengthen the distance , by various circumlocution and discursive staggerings , like unto those in which drunken men under the pressure of a too mighty flow of idea , be prone to indulge ) ; still , I do mean to say , and do say distinctly , that it be the invariable practice of many mighty philosopher , in carry out their theory , to evince great wisdom and foresight in provide against every possible contingency which can be suppose at all likely to affect themselves .
Thus , to do a great right , you may do a little wrong ; and you may take any mean which the end to be attain , will justify ; the amount of the right , or the amount of the wrong , or indeed the distinction between the two , be leave entirely to the philosopher concern , to be settle and determine by his clear , comprehensive , and impartial view of his own particular case .
It be not until the two boy have scour , with great rapidity , through a most intricate maze of narrow street and court , that they venture to halt beneath a low and dark archway .
Having remain silent here , just long enough to recover breath to speak , Master Bates utter an exclamation of amusement and delight ; and , burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter , flung himself upon a doorstep , and roll thereon in a transport of mirth .
“ What ’ s the matter ? ” inquire the Dodger .
“ Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” roar Charley Bates .
“ Hold your noise , ” remonstrate the Dodger , look cautiously round .
“ Do you want to be grab , stupid ? ” “ I can ’ t help it , ” say Charley , “ I can ’ t help it !
To see him split away at that pace , and cut round the corner , and knock up again ’ the post , and start on again a if he be make of iron as well a them , and me with the wipe in my pocket , sing out arter him—oh , my eye ! ” The vivid imagination of Master Bates present the scene before him in too strong colour .
As he arrive at this apostrophe , he again roll upon the door-step , and laugh loud than before .
“ What ’ ll Fagin say ? ” inquire the Dodger ; take advantage of the next interval of breathlessness on the part of his friend to propound the question .
“ What ? ” repeat Charley Bates .
“ Ah , what ? ” say the Dodger .
“ Why , what should he say ? ” inquired Charley : stopping rather suddenly in his merriment ; for the Dodger ’ s manner be impressive .
“ What should he say ? ” Mr. Dawkins whistle for a couple of minute ; then , take off his hat , scratch his head , and nodded thrice .
“ What do you mean ? ” say Charley .
“ Toor rul lol loo , gammon and spinnage , the frog he wouldn ’ t , and high cockolorum , ” say the Dodger : with a slight sneer on his intellectual countenance .
This be explanatory , but not satisfactory .
Master Bates felt it so ; and again say , “ What do you mean ? ” The Dodger make no reply ; but put his hat on again , and gather the skirt of his long-tailed coat under his arm , thrust his tongue into his cheek , slap the bridge of his nose some half-dozen time in a familiar but expressive manner , and turn on his heel , slink down the court .
Master Bates follow , with a thoughtful countenance .
The noise of footstep on the creaking stair , a few minute after the occurrence of this conversation , rouse the merry old gentleman a he sit over the fire with a saveloy and a small loaf in his hand ; a pocket-knife in his right ; and a pewter pot on the trivet .
There be a rascally smile on his white face a he turn round , and look sharply out from under his thick red eyebrow , bend his ear towards the door , and listen .
“ Why , how ’ s this ? ” mutter the Jew : change countenance ; “ only two of ’ em ?
Where ’ s the third ?
They can ’ t have get into trouble .
Hark ! ” The footstep approach nearer ; they reach the landing .
The door be slowly open ; and the Dodger and Charley Bates enter , close it behind them .
CHAPTER XIII .
SOME NEW ACQUAINTANCES ARE INTRODUCED TO THE INTELLIGENT READER , CONNECTED WITH WHOM VARIOUS PLEASANT MATTERS ARE RELATED , APPERTAINING TO THIS HISTORY “ Where ’ s Oliver ? ” say the Jew , rise with a menacing look .
“ Where ’ s the boy ? ” The young thief eye their preceptor a if they be alarm at his violence ; and look uneasily at each other .
But they make no reply .
“ What ’ s become of the boy ? ” say the Jew , seize the Dodger tightly by the collar , and threaten him with horrid imprecation .
“ Speak out , or I ’ ll throttle you ! ” Mr. Fagin look so very much in earnest , that Charley Bates , who deem it prudent in all case to be on the safe side , and who conceive it by no mean improbable that it might be his turn to be throttle second , drop upon his knee , and raise a loud , well-sustained , and continuous roar—something between a mad bull and a speaking trumpet .
“ Will you speak ? ” thunder the Jew : shake the Dodger so much that his keep in the big coat at all , seem perfectly miraculous .
“ Why , the trap have get him , and that ’ s all about it , ” say the Dodger , sullenly .
“ Come , let go o ’ me , will you ! ” And , swing himself , at one jerk , clean out of the big coat , which he leave in the Jew ’ s hand , the Dodger snatch up the toasting fork , and make a pas at the merry old gentleman ’ s waistcoat ; which , if it have take effect , would have let a little more merriment out than could have be easily replace .
The Jew step back in this emergency , with more agility than could have be anticipate in a man of his apparent decrepitude ; and , seize up the pot , prepare to hurl it at his assailant ’ s head .
But Charley Bates , at this moment , call his attention by a perfectly terrific howl , he suddenly alter it destination , and fling it full at that young gentleman .
“ Why , what the blaze be in the wind now ! ” growl a deep voice .
“ Who pitch that ’ ere at me ?
It ’ s well it ’ s the beer , and not the pot , a hit me , or I ’ d have settle somebody .
I might have know ’ d , a nobody but an infernal , rich , plunder , thunder old Jew could afford to throw away any drink but water—and not that , unless he do the River Company every quarter .
Wot ’ s it all about , Fagin ?
D—me , if my neck-handkercher an ’ t line with beer !
Come in , you sneak warmint ; wot be you stop outside for , a if you be ashamed of your master !
Come in ! ” The man who growl out these word , be a stoutly-built fellow of about five-and-thirty , in a black velveteen coat , very soiled drab breech , lace-up half boot , and grey cotton stocking which inclose a bulky pair of leg , with large swell calf ; —the kind of leg , which in such costume , always look in an unfinished and incomplete state without a set of fetter to garnish them .
He have a brown hat on his head , and a dirty belcher handkerchief round his neck : with the long frayed end of which he smear the beer from his face a he speak .
He disclose , when he have do so , a broad heavy countenance with a beard of three day ’ growth , and two scowl eye ; one of which display various parti-coloured symptom of have be recently damage by a blow .
“ Come in , d ’ ye hear ? ” growl this engage ruffian .
A white shaggy dog , with his face scratch and torn in twenty different place , skulk into the room .
“ Why didn ’ t you come in afore ? ” say the man .
“ You ’ re get too proud to own me afore company , be you ?
Lie down ! ” This command be accompany with a kick , which send the animal to the other end of the room .
He appear well use to it , however ; for he coil himself up in a corner very quietly , without utter a sound , and wink his very ill-looking eye twenty time in a minute , appear to occupy himself in take a survey of the apartment .
“ What be you up to ?
Ill-treating the boy , you covetous , avaricious , in-sa-ti-a-ble old fence ? ” say the man , seat himself deliberately .
“ I wonder they don ’ t murder you !
I would if I be them .
If I ’ d be your ’ prentice , I ’ d have do it long ago , and—no , I couldn ’ t have sell you afterwards , for you ’ re fit for nothing but keep a a curiousity of ugliness in a glass bottle , and I suppose they don ’ t blow glass bottle large enough. ” “ Hush !
hush !
Mr. Sikes , ” say the Jew , tremble ; “ don ’ t speak so loud ! ” “ None of your mistering , ” reply the ruffian ; “ you always mean mischief when you come that .
You know my name : out with it !
I shan ’ t disgrace it when the time comes. ” “ Well , well , then—Bill Sikes , ” say the Jew , with abject humility .
“ You seem out of humour , Bill. ” “ Perhaps I be , ” reply Sikes ; “ I should think you be rather out of sort too , unless you mean a little harm when you throw pewter pot about , a you do when you blab and— ” “ Are you mad ? ” say the Jew , catch the man by the sleeve , and point towards the boy .
Mr. Sikes content himself with tie an imaginary knot under his left ear , and jerk his head over on the right shoulder ; a piece of dumb show which the Jew appear to understand perfectly .
He then , in cant term , with which his whole conversation be plentifully besprinkle , but which would be quite unintelligible if they be record here , demand a glass of liquor .
“ And mind you don ’ t poison it , ” say Mr. Sikes , lay his hat upon the table .
This be say in jest ; but if the speaker could have see the evil leer with which the Jew bite his pale lip a he turn round to the cupboard , he might have think the caution not wholly unnecessary , or the wish ( at all event ) to improve upon the distiller ’ s ingenuity not very far from the old gentleman ’ s merry heart .
After swallow two of three glass of spirit , Mr. Sikes condescend to take some notice of the young gentleman ; which gracious act lead to a conversation , in which the cause and manner of Oliver ’ s capture be circumstantially detail , with such alteration and improvement on the truth , a to the Dodger appear most advisable under the circumstance .
“ I ’ m afraid , ” say the Jew , “ that he may say something which will get u into trouble. ” “ That ’ s very likely , ” return Sikes with a malicious grin .
“ You ’ re blow upon , Fagin. ” “ And I ’ m afraid , you see , ” add the Jew , speaking a if he have not notice the interruption ; and regard the other closely a he do so , — “ I ’ m afraid that , if the game be up with u , it might be up with a good many more , and that it would come out rather bad for you than it would for me , my dear. ” The man start , and turn round upon the Jew .
But the old gentleman ’ s shoulder be shrug up to his ear ; and his eye be vacantly star on the opposite wall .
There be a long pause .
Every member of the respectable coterie appear plunge in his own reflection ; not except the dog , who by a certain malicious licking of his lip seem to be meditate an attack upon the leg of the first gentleman or lady he might encounter in the street when he go out .
“ Somebody must find out wot ’ s be do at the office , ” say Mr. Sikes in a much low tone than he have take since he come in .
The Jew nod assent .
“ If he hasn ’ t peach , and be commit , there ’ s no fear till he come out again , ” say Mr. Sikes , “ and then he must be take care on .
You must get hold of him somehow. ” Again the Jew nod .
The prudence of this line of action , indeed , be obvious ; but , unfortunately , there be one very strong objection to it be adopt .
This be , that the Dodger , and Charley Bates , and Fagin , and Mr. William Sikes , happen , one and all , to entertain a violent and deeply-rooted antipathy to go near a police-office on any ground or pretext whatever .
How long they might have sit and look at each other , in a state of uncertainty not the most pleasant of it kind , it be difficult to guess .
It be not necessary to make any guess on the subject , however ; for the sudden entrance of the two young lady whom Oliver have see on a former occasion , cause the conversation to flow afresh .
“ The very thing ! ” say the Jew .
“ Bet will go ; win ’ t you , my dear ? ” “ Wheres ? ” inquire the young lady .
“ Only just up to the office , my dear , ” say the Jew coaxingly .
It be due to the young lady to say that she do not positively affirm that she would not , but that she merely express an emphatic and earnest desire to be “ bless ” if she would ; a polite and delicate evasion of the request , which show the young lady to have be possess of that natural good breeding which can not bear to inflict upon a fellow-creature , the pain of a direct and point refusal .
The Jew ’ s countenance fell .
He turn from this young lady , who be gaily , not to say gorgeously attire , in a red gown , green boot , and yellow curl-papers , to the other female .
“ Nancy , my dear , ” say the Jew in a soothing manner , “ what do _you_ say ? ” “ That it win ’ t do ; so it ’ s no use a-trying it on , Fagin , ” reply Nancy .
“ What do you mean by that ? ” say Mr. Sikes , look up in a surly manner .
“ What I say , Bill , ” reply the lady collectedly .
“ Why , you ’ re just the very person for it , ” reason Mr. Sikes : “ nobody about here know anything of you. ” “ And a I don ’ t want ’ em to , neither , ” reply Nancy in the same composed manner , “ it ’ s rather more no than yes with me , Bill. ” “ She ’ ll go , Fagin , ” say Sikes .
“ No , she win ’ t , Fagin , ” say Nancy .
“ Yes , she will , Fagin , ” say Sikes .
And Mr. Sikes be right .
By dint of alternate threat , promise , and bribe , the lady in question be ultimately prevail upon to undertake the commission .
She be not , indeed , withhold by the same consideration a her agreeable friend ; for , have recently remove into the neighborhood of Field Lane from the remote but genteel suburb of Ratcliffe , she be not under the same apprehension of be recognise by any of her numerous acquaintance .
Accordingly , with a clean white apron tie over her gown , and her curl-papers tuck up under a straw bonnet , —both article of dress be provide from the Jew ’ s inexhaustible stock , —Miss Nancy prepare to issue forth on her errand .
“ Stop a minute , my dear , ” say the Jew , produce , a little covered basket .
“ Carry that in one hand .
It look more respectable , my dear. ” “ Give her a door-key to carry in her t ’ other one , Fagin , ” say Sikes ; “ it look real and genivine like. ” “ Yes , yes , my dear , so it do , ” say the Jew , hang a large street-door key on the forefinger of the young lady ’ s right hand .
“ There ; very good !
Very good indeed , my dear ! ” say the Jew , rub his hand .
“ Oh , my brother !
My poor , dear , sweet , innocent little brother ! ” exclaim Nancy , burst into tear , and wring the little basket and the street-door key in an agony of distress .
“ What have become of him !
Where have they take him to !
Oh , do have pity , and tell me what ’ s be do with the dear boy , gentleman ; do , gentlemen , if you please , gentleman ! ” Having utter those word in a most lamentable and heart-broken tone : to the immeasurable delight of her hearer : Miss Nancy pause , wink to the company , nod smilingly round , and disappear .
“ Ah , she ’ s a clever girl , my dear , ” say the Jew , turn round to his young friend , and shake his head gravely , a if in mute admonition to them to follow the bright example they have just behold .
“ She ’ s a honour to her sex , ” say Mr. Sikes , fill his glass , and smite the table with his enormous fist .
“ Here ’ s her health , and wish they be all like her ! ” While these , and many other encomium , be be pass on the accomplished Nancy , that young lady make the best of her way to the police-office ; whither , notwithstanding a little natural timidity consequent upon walk through the street alone and unprotected , she arrive in perfect safety shortly afterwards .
Entering by the back way , she tap softly with the key at one of the cell-doors , and listen .
There be no sound within : so she cough and listen again .
Still there be no reply : so she speak .
“ Nolly , dear ? ” murmur Nancy in a gentle voice ; “ Nolly ? ” There be nobody inside but a miserable shoeless criminal , who have be take up for play the flute , and who , the offence against society have be clearly prove , have be very properly commit by Mr. Fang to the House of Correction for one month ; with the appropriate and amusing remark that since he have so much breath to spare , it would be more wholesomely expend on the treadmill than in a musical instrument .
He make no answer : be occupy mentally bewail the loss of the flute , which have be confiscate for the use of the county : so Nancy pass on to the next cell , and knock there .
“ Well ! ” cry a faint and feeble voice .
“ Is there a little boy here ? ” inquire Nancy , with a preliminary sob .
“ No , ” reply the voice ; “ God forbid. ” This be a vagrant of sixty-five , who be go to prison for _not_ play the flute ; or , in other word , for beg in the street , and do nothing for his livelihood .
In the next cell be another man , who be go to the same prison for hawk tin saucepan without license ; thereby do something for his living , in defiance of the Stamp-office .
But , a neither of these criminal answer to the name of Oliver , or know anything about him , Nancy make straight up to the bluff officer in the striped waistcoat ; and with the most piteous wailing and lamentation , render more piteous by a prompt and efficient use of the street-door key and the little basket , demand her own dear brother .
“ I haven ’ t get him , my dear , ” say the old man .
“ Where be he ? ” scream Nancy , in a distracted manner .
“ Why , the gentleman ’ s get him , ” reply the officer .
“ What gentleman !
Oh , gracious heaven !
What gentleman ? ” exclaim Nancy .
In reply to this incoherent questioning , the old man inform the deeply affect sister that Oliver have be take ill in the office , and discharge in consequence of a witness have prove the robbery to have be commit by another boy , not in custody ; and that the prosecutor have carry him away , in an insensible condition , to his own residence : of and concern which , all the informant knew be , that it be somewhere in Pentonville , he have hear that word mention in the direction to the coachman .
In a dreadful state of doubt and uncertainty , the agonised young woman stagger to the gate , and then , exchange her faltering walk for a swift run , return by the most devious and complicate route she could think of , to the domicile of the Jew .
Mr. Bill Sikes no sooner hear the account of the expedition deliver , than he very hastily call up the white dog , and , put on his hat , expeditiously depart : without devote any time to the formality of wish the company good-morning .
“ We must know where he be , my dear ; he must be find , ” say the Jew greatly excite .
“ Charley , do nothing but skulk about , till you bring home some news of him !
Nancy , my dear , I must have him find .
I trust to you , my dear , —to you and the Artful for everything !
Stay , stay , ” add the Jew , unlock a drawer with a shaking hand ; “ there ’ s money , my dear .
I shall shut up this shop to-night .
You ’ ll know where to find me !
Don ’ t stop here a minute .
Not an instant , my dear ! ” With these word , he push them from the room : and carefully double-locking and bar the door behind them , draw from it place of concealment the box which he have unintentionally disclose to Oliver .
Then , he hastily proceed to dispose the watch and jewellery beneath his clothing .
A rap at the door startle him in this occupation .
“ Who ’ s there ? ” he cry in a shrill tone .
“ Me ! ” reply the voice of the Dodger , through the key-hole .
“ What now ? ” cry the Jew impatiently .
“ Is he to be kidnap to the other ken , Nancy say ? ” inquire the Dodger .
“ Yes , ” reply the Jew , “ wherever she lay hand on him .
Find him , find him out , that ’ s all .
I shall know what to do next ; never fear. ” The boy murmur a reply of intelligence : and hurry downstairs after his companion .
“ He have not peach so far , ” say the Jew a he pursue his occupation .
“ If he mean to blab u among his new friend , we may stop his mouth yet. ” CHAPTER XIV .
COMPRISING FURTHER PARTICULARS OF OLIVER ’ S STAY AT MR. BROWNLOW ’ S , WITH THE REMARKABLE PREDICTION WHICH ONE MR. GRIMWIG UTTERED CONCERNING HIM , WHEN HE WENT OUT ON AN ERRAND Oliver soon recover from the fainting-fit into which Mr. Brownlow ’ s abrupt exclamation have throw him , the subject of the picture be carefully avoid , both by the old gentleman and Mrs. Bedwin , in the conversation that ensue : which indeed bore no reference to Oliver ’ s history or prospect , but be confine to such topic a might amuse without excite him .
He be still too weak to get up to breakfast ; but , when he come down into the housekeeper ’ s room next day , his first act be to cast an eager glance at the wall , in the hope of again look on the face of the beautiful lady .
His expectation be disappointed , however , for the picture have be remove .
“ Ah ! ” say the housekeeper , watch the direction of Oliver ’ s eye .
“ It be go , you see. ” “ I see it be ma ’ be , ” reply Oliver .
“ Why have they take it away ? ” “ It have be take down , child , because Mr. Brownlow say , that a it seem to worry you , perhaps it might prevent your get well , you know , ” rejoin the old lady .
“ Oh , no , indeed .
It didn ’ t worry me , ma ’ be , ” say Oliver .
“ I like to see it .
I quite love it. ” “ Well , well ! ” say the old lady , good-humouredly ; “ you get well as fast a ever you can , dear , and it shall be hang up again .
There !
I promise you that !
Now , let u talk about something else. ” This be all the information Oliver could obtain about the picture at that time .
As the old lady have be so kind to him in his illness , he endeavour to think no more of the subject just then ; so he listen attentively to a great many story she tell him , about an amiable and handsome daughter of hers , who be marry to an amiable and handsome man , and live in the country ; and about a son , who be clerk to a merchant in the West Indies ; and who be , also , such a good young man , and write such dutiful letter home four time a-year , that it bring the tear into her eye to talk about them .
When the old lady have expatiate , a long time , on the excellence of her child , and the merit of her kind good husband besides , who have be dead and go , poor dear soul !
just six-and-twenty year , it be time to have tea .
After tea she begin to teach Oliver cribbage : which he learn as quickly a she could teach : and at which game they play , with great interest and gravity , until it be time for the invalid to have some warm wine and water , with a slice of dry toast , and then to go cosily to bed .
They be happy day , those of Oliver ’ s recovery .
Everything be so quiet , and neat , and orderly ; everybody so kind and gentle ; that after the noise and turbulence in the midst of which he have always live , it seem like Heaven itself .
He be no sooner strong enough to put his clothes on , properly , than Mr. Brownlow cause a complete new suit , and a new cap , and a new pair of shoe , to be provide for him .
As Oliver be tell that he might do what he like with the old clothes , he give them to a servant who have be very kind to him , and ask her to sell them to a Jew , and keep the money for herself .
This she very readily do ; and , a Oliver look out of the parlour window , and saw the Jew roll them up in his bag and walk away , he felt quite delight to think that they be safely go , and that there be now no possible danger of his ever be able to wear them again .
They be sad rag , to tell the truth ; and Oliver have never have a new suit before .
One evening , about a week after the affair of the picture , a he be sit talk to Mrs. Bedwin , there come a message down from Mr. Brownlow , that if Oliver Twist felt pretty well , he should like to see him in his study , and talk to him a little while .
“ Bless u , and save u !
Wash your hand , and let me part your hair nicely for you , child , ” say Mrs. Bedwin .
“ Dear heart alive !
If we have know he would have ask for you , we would have put you a clean collar on , and make you as smart a sixpence ! ” Oliver do a the old lady bid him ; and , although she lament grievously , meanwhile , that there be not even time to crimp the little frill that border his shirt-collar ; he look so delicate and handsome , despite that important personal advantage , that she go so far a to say : look at him with great complacency from head to foot , that she really didn ’ t think it would have be possible , on the long notice , to have make much difference in him for the good .
Thus encourage , Oliver tap at the study door .
On Mr. Brownlow call to him to come in , he find himself in a little back room , quite full of book , with a window , look into some pleasant little garden .
There be a table draw up before the window , at which Mr. Brownlow be seat reading .
When he saw Oliver , he push the book away from him , and tell him to come near the table , and sit down .
Oliver comply ; marvel where the people could be find to read such a great number of book a seem to be write to make the world wiser .
Which be still a marvel to more experienced people than Oliver Twist , every day of their life .
“ There be a good many book , be there not , my boy ? ” say Mr. Brownlow , observe the curiosity with which Oliver survey the shelf that reach from the floor to the ceiling .
“ A great number , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ I never saw so many. ” “ You shall read them , if you behave well , ” say the old gentleman kindly ; “ and you will like that , good than look at the outside , —that be , some case ; because there be book of which the back and cover be by far the best parts. ” “ I suppose they be those heavy one , sir , ” say Oliver , point to some large quarto , with a good deal of gild about the binding .
“ Not always those , ” say the old gentleman , pat Oliver on the head , and smile a he do so ; “ there be other equally heavy one , though of a much small size .
How should you like to grow up a clever man , and write book , eh ? ” “ I think I would rather read them , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ What !
wouldn ’ t you like to be a book-writer ? ” say the old gentleman .
Oliver consider a little while ; and at last say , he should think it would be a much well thing to be a book-seller ; upon which the old gentleman laugh heartily , and declare he have say a very good thing .
Which Oliver felt glad to have do , though he by no mean know what it be .
“ Well , well , ” say the old gentleman , compose his feature .
“ Don ’ t be afraid !
We win ’ t make an author of you , while there ’ s an honest trade to be learnt , or brick-making to turn to. ” “ Thank you , sir , ” say Oliver .
At the earnest manner of his reply , the old gentleman laugh again ; and say something about a curious instinct , which Oliver , not understanding , pay no very great attention to .
“ Now , ” say Mr. Brownlow , speak if possible in a kinder , but at the same time in a much more serious manner , than Oliver have ever know him assume yet , “ I want you to pay great attention , my boy , to what I be go to say .
I shall talk to you without any reserve ; because I be sure you be well able to understand me , a many old person would be. ” “ Oh , don ’ t tell you be go to send me away , sir , pray ! ” exclaim Oliver , alarm at the serious tone of the old gentleman ’ s commencement !
“ Don ’ t turn me out of door to wander in the street again .
Let me stay here , and be a servant .
Don ’ t send me back to the wretched place I come from .
Have mercy upon a poor boy , sir ! ” “ My dear child , ” say the old gentleman , move by the warmth of Oliver ’ s sudden appeal ; “ you need not be afraid of my deserting you , unless you give me cause. ” “ I never , never will , sir , ” interpose Oliver .
“ I hope not , ” rejoin the old gentleman .
“ I do not think you ever will .
I have be deceive , before , in the object whom I have endeavour to benefit ; but I feel strongly dispose to trust you , nevertheless ; and I be more interested in your behalf than I can well account for , even to myself .
The person on whom I have bestow my dear love , lie deep in their graf ; but , although the happiness and delight of my life lie bury there too , I have not make a coffin of my heart , and seal it up , forever , on my best affection .
Deep affliction have but strengthen and refine them. ” As the old gentleman say this in a low voice : more to himself than to his companion : and a he remain silent for a short time afterwards : Oliver sit quite still .
“ Well , well ! ” say the old gentleman at length , in a more cheerful tone , “ I only say this , because you have a young heart ; and know that I have suffer great pain and sorrow , you will be more careful , perhaps , not to wind me again .
You say you be an orphan , without a friend in the world ; all the inquiry I have be able to make , confirm the statement .
Let me hear your story ; where you come from ; who bring you up ; and how you get into the company in which I find you .
Speak the truth , and you shall not be friendless while I live. ” Oliver ’ s sob check his utterance for some minute ; when he be on the point of begin to relate how he have be bring up at the farm , and carry to the workhouse by Mr. Bumble , a peculiarly impatient little double-knock be hear at the street-door : and the servant , run upstairs , announce Mr. Grimwig .
“ Is he come up ? ” inquire Mr. Brownlow .
“ Yes , sir , ” reply the servant .
“ He ask if there be any muffin in the house ; and , when I tell him yes , he say he have come to tea. ” Mr. Brownlow smile ; and , turn to Oliver , say that Mr. Grimwig be an old friend of his , and he must not mind his be a little rough in his manner ; for he be a worthy creature at bottom , a he have reason to know .
“ Shall I go downstairs , sir ? ” inquire Oliver .
“ No , ” reply Mr. Brownlow , “ I would rather you remain here. ” At this moment , there walk into the room : support himself by a thick stick : a stout old gentleman , rather lame in one leg , who be dress in a blue coat , strip waistcoat , nankeen breech and gaiter , and a broad-brimmed white hat , with the side turn up with green .
A very small-plaited shirt frill stick out from his waistcoat ; and a very long steel watch-chain , with nothing but a key at the end , dangle loosely below it .
The end of his white neckerchief be twist into a ball about the size of an orange ; the variety of shape into which his countenance be twist , defy description .
He have a manner of screw his head on one side when he speak ; and of look out of the corner of his eye at the same time : which irresistibly remind the beholder of a parrot .
In this attitude , he fix himself , the moment he make his appearance ; and , hold out a small piece of orange-peel at arm ’ s length , exclaim , in a growling , discontented voice .
“ Look here !
do you see this !
Isn ’ t it a most wonderful and extraordinary thing that I can ’ t call at a man ’ s house but I find a piece of this poor surgeon ’ s friend on the staircase ?
I ’ ve be lam with orange-peel once , and I know orange-peel will be my death , or I ’ ll be content to eat my own head , sir ! ” This be the handsome offer with which Mr. Grimwig back and confirm nearly every assertion he make ; and it be the more singular in his case , because , even admit for the sake of argument , the possibility of scientific improvement be bring to that pas which will enable a gentleman to eat his own head in the event of his be so dispose , Mr. Grimwig ’ s head be such a particularly large one , that the most sanguine man alive could hardly entertain a hope of be able to get through it at a sitting—to put entirely out of the question , a very thick coating of powder .
“ I ’ ll eat my head , sir , ” repeat Mr. Grimwig , strike his stick upon the ground .
“ Hallo !
what ’ s that ! ” look at Oliver , and retreat a pace or two .
“ This be young Oliver Twist , whom we be speak about , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
Oliver bow .
“ You don ’ t mean to say that ’ s the boy who have the fever , I hope ? ” say Mr. Grimwig , recoil a little more .
“ Wait a minute !
Don ’ t speak !
Stop— ” continue Mr. Grimwig , abruptly , lose all dread of the fever in his triumph at the discovery ; “ that ’ s the boy who have the orange !
If that ’ s not the boy , sir , who have the orange , and throw this bit of peel upon the staircase , I ’ ll eat my head , and his too. ” “ No , no , he have not have one , ” say Mr. Brownlow , laugh .
“ Come !
Put down your hat ; and speak to my young friend. ” “ I feel strongly on this subject , sir , ” say the irritable old gentleman , draw off his glove .
“ There ’ s always more or less orange-peel on the pavement in our street ; and I _know_ it ’ s put there by the surgeon ’ s boy at the corner .
A young woman stumble over a bit last night , and fell against my garden-railings ; directly she get up I saw her look towards his infernal red lamp with the pantomime-light .
‘ Don ’ t go to him , ’ I call out of the window , ‘ he ’ s an assassin !
A man-trap ! ’ So he be .
If he be not— ” Here the irascible old gentleman give a great knock on the ground with his stick ; which be always understand , by his friend , to imply the customary offer , whenever it be not express in word .
Then , still keep his stick in his hand , he sit down ; and , open a double eye-glass , which he wear attach to a broad black riband , take a view of Oliver : who , see that he be the object of inspection , colour , and bow again .
“ That ’ s the boy , be it ? ” say Mr. Grimwig , at length .
“ That ’ s the boy , ” reply Mr. Brownlow .
“ How be you , boy ? ” say Mr. Grimwig .
“ A great deal well , thank you , sir , ” reply Oliver .
Mr. Brownlow , seem to apprehend that his singular friend be about to say something disagreeable , ask Oliver to step downstairs and tell Mrs. Bedwin they be ready for tea ; which , a he do not half like the visitor ’ s manner , he be very happy to do .
“ He be a nice-looking boy , be he not ? ” inquire Mr. Brownlow .
“ I don ’ t know , ” reply Mr. Grimwig , pettishly .
“ Don ’ t know ? ” “ No .
I don ’ t know .
I never see any difference in boy .
I only know two sort of boy .
Mealy boy , and beef-faced boys. ” “ And which be Oliver ? ” “ Mealy .
I know a friend who have a beef-faced boy ; a fine boy , they call him ; with a round head , and red cheek , and glare eye ; a horrid boy ; with a body and limb that appear to be swell out of the seam of his blue clothes ; with the voice of a pilot , and the appetite of a wolf .
I know him !
The wretch ! ” “ Come , ” say Mr. Brownlow , “ these be not the characteristic of young Oliver Twist ; so he needn ’ t excite your wrath. ” “ They be not , ” reply Mr. Grimwig .
“ He may have worse. ” Here , Mr. Brownlow cough impatiently ; which appear to afford Mr. Grimwig the most exquisite delight .
“ He may have bad , I say , ” repeat Mr. Grimwig .
“ Where do he come from !
Who be he ?
What be he ?
He have have a fever .
What of that ?
Fevers be not peculiar to good people ; be they ?
Bad people have fever sometimes ; haven ’ t they , eh ?
I know a man who be hang in Jamaica for murder his master .
He have have a fever six time ; he wasn ’ t recommend to mercy on that account .
Pooh !
nonsense ! ” Now , the fact be , that in the inmost recess of his own heart , Mr. Grimwig be strongly dispose to admit that Oliver ’ s appearance and manner be unusually prepossess ; but he have a strong appetite for contradiction , sharpen on this occasion by the finding of the orange-peel ; and , inwardly determine that no man should dictate to him whether a boy be well-looking or not , he have resolve , from the first , to oppose his friend .
When Mr. Brownlow admit that on no one point of inquiry could he yet return a satisfactory answer ; and that he have postpone any investigation into Oliver ’ s previous history until he think the boy be strong enough to hear it ; Mr. Grimwig chuckle maliciously .
And he demand , with a sneer , whether the housekeeper be in the habit of count the plate at night ; because if she didn ’ t find a table-spoon or two miss some sunshiny morning , why , he would be content to—and so forth .
All this , Mr. Brownlow , although himself somewhat of an impetuous gentleman : know his friend ’ s peculiarity , bore with great good humour ; a Mr. Grimwig , at tea , be graciously pleased to express his entire approval of the muffin , matter go on very smoothly ; and Oliver , who make one of the party , begin to feel more at his ease than he have yet do in the fierce old gentleman ’ s presence .
“ And when be you go to hear a full , true , and particular account of the life and adventure of Oliver Twist ? ” ask Grimwig of Mr. Brownlow , at the conclusion of the meal ; look sideways at Oliver , a he resume his subject .
“ To-morrow morning , ” reply Mr. Brownlow .
“ I would rather he be alone with me at the time .
Come up to me to-morrow morning at ten o ’ clock , my dear. ” “ Yes , sir , ” reply Oliver .
He answer with some hesitation , because he be confuse by Mr. Grimwig ’ s look so hard at him .
“ I ’ ll tell you what , ” whisper that gentleman to Mr. Brownlow ; “ he win ’ t come up to you to-morrow morning .
I saw him hesitate .
He be deceive you , my good friend. ” “ I ’ ll swear he be not , ” reply Mr. Brownlow , warmly .
“ If he be not , ” say Mr. Grimwig , “ I ’ ll— ” and down go the stick .
“ I ’ ll answer for that boy ’ s truth with my life ! ” say Mr. Brownlow , knock the table .
“ And I for his falsehood with my head ! ” rejoin Mr. Grimwig , knock the table also .
“ We shall see , ” say Mr. Brownlow , check his rise anger .
“ We will , ” reply Mr. Grimwig , with a provoking smile ; “ we will. ” As fate would have it , Mrs. Bedwin chance to bring in , at this moment , a small parcel of book , which Mr. Brownlow have that morning purchase of the identical bookstall-keeper , who have already figure in this history ; have lay them on the table , she prepare to leave the room .
“ Stop the boy , Mrs. Bedwin ! ” say Mr. Brownlow ; “ there be something to go back. ” “ He have go , sir , ” reply Mrs. Bedwin .
“ Call after him , ” say Mr. Brownlow ; “ it ’ s particular .
He be a poor man , and they be not pay for .
There be some book to be take back , too. ” The street-door be open .
Oliver run one way ; and the girl run another ; and Mrs. Bedwin stand on the step and scream for the boy ; but there be no boy in sight .
Oliver and the girl return , in a breathless state , to report that there be no tidings of him .
“ Dear me , I be very sorry for that , ” exclaim Mr. Brownlow ; “ I particularly wish those book to be return to-night. ” “ Send Oliver with them , ” say Mr. Grimwig , with an ironical smile ; “ he will be sure to deliver them safely , you know. ” “ Yes ; do let me take them , if you please , sir , ” say Oliver .
“ I ’ ll run all the way , sir. ” The old gentleman be just go to say that Oliver should not go out on any account ; when a most malicious cough from Mr. Grimwig determine him that he should ; and that , by his prompt discharge of the commission , he should prove to him the injustice of his suspicion : on this head at least : at once .
“ You _shall_ go , my dear , ” say the old gentleman .
“ The book be on a chair by my table .
Fetch them down. ” Oliver , delight to be of use , bring down the book under his arm in a great bustle ; and wait , cap in hand , to hear what message he be to take .
“ You be to say , ” say Mr. Brownlow , glance steadily at Grimwig ; “ you be to say that you have bring those book back ; and that you have come to pay the four pound ten I owe him .
This be a five-pound note , so you will have to bring me back , ten shilling change. ” “ I win ’ t be ten minute , sir , ” say Oliver , eagerly .
Having button up the bank-note in his jacket pocket , and place the book carefully under his arm , he make a respectful bow , and leave the room .
Mrs. Bedwin follow him to the street-door , give him many direction about the near way , and the name of the bookseller , and the name of the street : all of which Oliver say he clearly understood .
Having superadded many injunction to be sure and not take cold , the old lady at length permit him to depart .
“ Bless his sweet face ! ” say the old lady , look after him .
“ I can ’ t bear , somehow , to let him go out of my sight. ” At this moment , Oliver look gaily round , and nod before he turn the corner .
The old lady smilingly return his salutation , and , close the door , go back to her own room .
“ Let me see ; he ’ ll be back in twenty minute , at the long , ” say Mr. Brownlow , pull out his watch , and place it on the table .
“ It will be dark by that time. ” “ Oh !
you really expect him to come back , do you ? ” inquire Mr. Grimwig .
“ Don ’ t you ? ” ask Mr. Brownlow , smile .
The spirit of contradiction be strong in Mr. Grimwig ’ s breast , at the moment ; and it be render strong by his friend ’ s confident smile .
“ No , ” he say , smite the table with his fist , “ I do not .
The boy have a new suit of clothes on his back , a set of valuable book under his arm , and a five-pound note in his pocket .
He ’ ll join his old friends the thief , and laugh at you .
If ever that boy return to this house , sir , I ’ ll eat my head. ” With these word he draw his chair closer to the table ; and there the two friend sit , in silent expectation , with the watch between them .
It be worthy of remark , a illustrate the importance we attach to our own judgment , and the pride with which we put forth our most rash and hasty conclusion , that , although Mr. Grimwig be not by any mean a bad-hearted man , and though he would have be unfeignedly sorry to see his respect friend duped and deceive , he really do most earnestly and strongly hope at that moment , that Oliver Twist might not come back .
It grow so dark , that the figure on the dial-plate be scarcely discernible ; but there the two old gentleman continue to sit , in silence , with the watch between them .
CHAPTER XV .
SHOWING HOW VERY FOND OF OLIVER TWIST , THE MERRY OLD JEW AND MISS NANCY WERE In the obscure parlour of a low public-house , in the filthy part of Little Saffron Hill ; a dark and gloomy den , where a flaring gas-light burnt all day in the winter-time ; and where no ray of sun ever shone in the summer : there sit , brood over a little pewter measure and a small glass , strongly impregnate with the smell of liquor , a man in a velveteen coat , drab short , half-boots and stocking , whom even by that dim light no experienced agent of the police would have hesitate to recognise a Mr. William Sikes .
At his foot , sit a white-coated , red-eyed dog ; who occupy himself , alternately , in wink at his master with both eye at the same time ; and in lick a large , fresh cut on one side of his mouth , which appear to be the result of some recent conflict .
“ Keep quiet , you warmint !
Keep quiet ! ” say Mr. Sikes , suddenly break silence .
Whether his meditation be so intense a to be disturb by the dog ’ s winking , or whether his feeling be so wrought upon by his reflection that they require all the relief derivable from kick an unoffending animal to allay them , be matter for argument and consideration .
Whatever be the cause , the effect be a kick and a curse , bestow upon the dog simultaneously .
Dogs be not generally apt to revenge injury inflict upon them by their master ; but Mr. Sikes ’ s dog , have fault of temper in common with his owner , and labouring , perhaps , at this moment , under a powerful sense of injury , make no more ado but at once fix his teeth in one of the half-boots .
Having give in a hearty shake , he retire , growl , under a form ; just escape the pewter measure which Mr. Sikes level at his head .
“ You would , would you ? ” say Sikes , seize the poker in one hand , and deliberately open with the other a large clasp-knife , which he draw from his pocket .
“ Come here , you bear devil !
Come here !
D ’ ye hear ? ” The dog no doubt heard ; because Mr. Sikes speak in the very harsh key of a very harsh voice ; but , appear to entertain some unaccountable objection to have his throat cut , he remain where he be , and growl more fiercely than before : at the same time grasp the end of the poker between his teeth , and bite at it like a wild beast .
This resistance only infuriate Mr. Sikes the more ; who , drop on his knee , begin to assail the animal most furiously .
The dog jump from right to leave , and from leave to right ; snap , growling , and barking ; the man thrust and swore , and strike and blaspheme ; and the struggle be reach a most critical point for one or other ; when , the door suddenly opening , the dog dart out : leave Bill Sikes with the poker and the clasp-knife in his hand .
There must always be two party to a quarrel , say the old adage .
Mr. Sikes , be disappoint of the dog ’ s participation , at once transfer his share in the quarrel to the new comer .
“ What the devil do you come in between me and my dog for ? ” say Sikes , with a fierce gesture .
“ I didn ’ t know , my dear , I didn ’ t know , ” reply Fagin , humbly ; for the Jew be the new comer .
“ Didn ’ t know , you white-livered thief ! ” growl Sikes .
“ Couldn ’ t you hear the noise ? ” “ Not a sound of it , a I ’ m a living man , Bill , ” reply the Jew .
“ Oh no !
You hear nothing , you don ’ t , ” retort Sikes with a fierce sneer .
“ Sneaking in and out , so a nobody hear how you come or go !
I wish you have be the dog , Fagin , half a minute ago. ” “ Why ? ” inquire the Jew with a force smile .
“ Cause the government , a care for the life of such men a you , a haven ’ t half the pluck of cur , let a man kill a dog how he like , ” reply Sikes , shut up the knife with a very expressive look ; “ that ’ s why. ” The Jew rub his hand ; and , sit down at the table , affect to laugh at the pleasantry of his friend .
He be obviously very ill at ease , however .
“ Grin away , ” say Sikes , replace the poker , and survey him with savage contempt ; “ grin away .
You ’ ll never have the laugh at me , though , unless it ’ s behind a nightcap .
I ’ ve get the upper hand over you , Fagin ; and , d—me , I ’ ll keep it .
There !
If I go , you go ; so take care of me. ” “ Well , well , my dear , ” say the Jew , “ I know all that ; we—we—have a mutual interest , Bill , —a mutual interest. ” “ Humph , ” say Sikes , a if he think the interest lay rather more on the Jew ’ s side than on his .
“ Well , what have you get to say to me ? ” “ It ’ s all pass safe through the melting-pot , ” reply Fagin , “ and this be your share .
It ’ s rather more than it ought to be , my dear ; but a I know you ’ ll do me a good turn another time , and— ” “ Stow that gammon , ” interpose the robber , impatiently .
“ Where be it ?
Hand over ! ” “ Yes , yes , Bill ; give me time , give me time , ” reply the Jew , soothingly .
“ Here it be !
All safe ! ” As he speak , he draw forth an old cotton handkerchief from his breast ; and untie a large knot in one corner , produce a small brown-paper packet .
Sikes , snatch it from him , hastily open it ; and proceed to count the sovereign it contain .
“ This be all , be it ? ” inquired Sikes .
“ All , ” reply the Jew .
“ You haven ’ t open the parcel and swallow one or two a you come along , have you ? ” inquired Sikes , suspiciously .
“ Don ’ t put on an injured look at the question ; you ’ ve do it many a time .
Jerk the tinkler. ” These word , in plain English , convey an injunction to ring the bell .
It be answer by another Jew : young than Fagin , but nearly a vile and repulsive in appearance .
Bill Sikes merely point to the empty measure .
The Jew , perfectly understand the hint , retire to fill it : previously exchange a remarkable look with Fagin , who raise his eye for an instant , a if in expectation of it , and shake his head in reply ; so slightly that the action would have be almost imperceptible to an observant third person .
It be lose upon Sikes , who be stoop at the moment to tie the boot-lace which the dog have tear .
Possibly , if he have observe the brief interchange of signal , he might have think that it bode no good to him .
“ Is anybody here , Barney ? ” inquire Fagin ; speaking , now that that Sikes be look on , without raise his eye from the ground .
“ Dot a shoul , ” reply Barney ; whose word : whether they come from the heart or not : make their way through the nose .
“ Nobody ? ” inquire Fagin , in a tone of surprise : which perhaps might mean that Barney be at liberty to tell the truth .
“ Dobody but Biss Dadsy , ” reply Barney .
“ Nancy ! ” exclaim Sikes .
“ Where ?
Strike me blind , if I don ’ t honour that ’ ere girl , for her native talents. ” “ She ’ s bid havid a plate of boiled beef id the bar , ” reply Barney .
“ Send her here , ” say Sikes , pour out a glass of liquor .
“ Send her here. ” Barney look timidly at Fagin , a if for permission ; the Jew remain silent , and not lift his eye from the ground , he retire ; and presently return , usher in Nancy ; who be decorate with the bonnet , apron , basket , and street-door key , complete .
“ You be on the scent , be you , Nancy ? ” inquire Sikes , proffer the glass .
“ Yes , I be , Bill , ” reply the young lady , dispose of it content ; “ and tire enough of it I be , too .
The young brat ’ s be ill and confine to the crib ; and— ” “ Ah , Nancy , dear ! ” say Fagin , look up .
Now , whether a peculiar contraction of the Jew ’ s red eye-brows , and a half closing of his deeply-set eye , warn Miss Nancy that she be dispose to be too communicative , be not a matter of much importance .
The fact be all we need care for here ; and the fact be , that she suddenly check herself , and with several gracious smile upon Mr. Sikes , turn the conversation to other matter .
In about ten minute ’ time , Mr. Fagin be seize with a fit of coughing ; upon which Nancy pull her shawl over her shoulder , and declare it be time to go .
Mr. Sikes , find that he be walk a short part of her way himself , express his intention of accompany her ; they go away together , follow , at a little distant , by the dog , who slink out of a back-yard as soon a his master be out of sight .
The Jew thrust his head out of the room door when Sikes have leave it ; look after him a he walk up the dark passage ; shake his clenched fist ; mutter a deep curse ; and then , with a horrible grin , reseat himself at the table ; where he be soon deeply absorb in the interesting page of the Hue-and-Cry .
Meanwhile , Oliver Twist , little dreaming that he be within so very short a distance of the merry old gentleman , be on his way to the book-stall .
When he get into Clerkenwell , he accidently turn down a by-street which be not exactly in his way ; but not discover his mistake until he have get half-way down it , and know it must lead in the right direction , he do not think it worth while to turn back ; and so march on , as quickly a he could , with the book under his arm .
He be walk along , think how happy and content he ought to feel ; and how much he would give for only one look at poor little Dick , who , starve and beaten , might be weep bitterly at that very moment ; when he be startle by a young woman scream out very loud .
“ Oh , my dear brother ! ” And he have hardly look up , to see what the matter be , when he be stop by have a pair of arm thrown tight round his neck .
“ Don ’ t , ” cry Oliver , struggle .
“ Let go of me .
Who be it ?
What be you stop me for ? ” The only reply to this , be a great number of loud lamentation from the young woman who have embrace him ; and who have a little basket and a street-door key in her hand .
“ Oh my gracious ! ” say the young woman , “ I have find him !
Oh !
Oliver !
Oliver !
Oh you naughty boy , to make me suffer such distress on your account !
Come home , dear , come .
Oh , I ’ ve find him .
Thank gracious goodness heavins , I ’ ve find him ! ” With these incoherent exclamation , the young woman burst into another fit of cry , and get so dreadfully hysterical , that a couple of woman who come up at the moment ask a butcher ’ s boy with a shiny head of hair anoint with suet , who be also look on , whether he didn ’ t think he have well run for the doctor .
To which , the butcher ’ s boy : who appear of a lounging , not to say indolent disposition : reply , that he think not .
“ Oh , no , no , never mind , ” say the young woman , grasp Oliver ’ s hand ; “ I ’ m well now .
Come home directly , you cruel boy !
Come ! ” “ Oh , ma ’ be , ” reply the young woman , “ he run away , near a month ago , from his parent , who be hard-working and respectable people ; and go and join a set of thief and bad character ; and almost break his mother ’ s heart. ” “ Young wretch ! ” say one woman .
“ Go home , do , you little brute , ” say the other .
“ I be not , ” reply Oliver , greatly alarm .
“ I don ’ t know her .
I haven ’ t any sister , or father and mother either .
I ’ m an orphan ; I live at Pentonville. ” “ Only hear him , how he brave it out ! ” cry the young woman .
“ Why , it ’ s Nancy ! ” exclaim Oliver ; who now saw her face for the first time ; and start back , in irrepressible astonishment .
“ You see he know me ! ” cried Nancy , appeal to the bystander .
“ He can ’ t help himself .
Make him come home , there ’ s good people , or he ’ ll kill his dear mother and father , and break my heart ! ” “ What the devil ’ s this ? ” say a man , burst out of a beer-shop , with a white dog at his heel ; “ young Oliver !
Come home to your poor mother , you young dog !
Come home directly. ” “ I don ’ t belong to them .
I don ’ t know them .
Help !
help ! ” cried Oliver , struggle in the man ’ s powerful grasp .
“ Help ! ” repeat the man .
“ Yes ; I ’ ll help you , you young rascal !
What book be these ?
You ’ ve be a steal ’ em , have you ?
Give ’ em here. ” With these word , the man tear the volume from his grasp , and strike him on the head .
“ That ’ s right ! ” cry a looker-on , from a garret-window .
“ That ’ s the only way of bring him to his sens ! ” “ To be sure ! ” cry a sleepy-faced carpenter , cast an approving look at the garret-window .
“ It ’ ll do him good ! ” say the two woman .
“ And he shall have it , too ! ” rejoin the man , administer another blow , and seize Oliver by the collar .
“ Come on , you young villain !
Here , Bull ’ s-eye , mind him , boy !
Mind him ! ” Weak with recent illness ; stupified by the blow and the suddenness of the attack ; terrify by the fierce growling of the dog , and the brutality of the man ; overpower by the conviction of the bystander that he really be the hardened little wretch he be describe to be ; what could one poor child do !
Darkness have set in ; it be a low neighborhood ; no help be near ; resistance be useless .
In another moment he be drag into a labyrinth of dark narrow court , and be force along them at a pace which render the few cry he dare to give utterance to , unintelligible .
It be of little moment , indeed , whether they be intelligible or no ; for there be nobody to care for them , have they be ever so plain .
The gas-lamps be light ; Mrs. Bedwin be wait anxiously at the open door ; the servant have run up the street twenty time to see if there be any trace of Oliver ; and still the two old gentleman sit , perseveringly , in the dark parlour , with the watch between them .
CHAPTER XVI .
RELATES WHAT BECAME OF OLIVER TWIST , AFTER HE HAD BEEN CLAIMED BY NANCY The narrow street and court , at length , terminate in a large open space ; scatter about which , be pen for beast , and other indication of a cattle-market .
Sikes slacken his pace when they reach this spot : the girl be quite unable to support any long , the rapid rate at which they have hitherto walk .
Turning to Oliver , he roughly command him to take hold of Nancy ’ s hand .
“ Do you hear ? ” growled Sikes , a Oliver hesitate , and look round .
They be in a dark corner , quite out of the track of passenger .
Oliver saw , but too plainly , that resistance would be of no avail .
He hold out his hand , which Nancy clasp tight in hers .
“ Give me the other , ” say Sikes , seize Oliver ’ s unoccupied hand .
“ Here , Bull ’ s-Eye ! ” The dog look up , and growl .
“ See here , boy ! ” say Sikes , put his other hand to Oliver ’ s throat ; “ if he speak ever so soft a word , hold him !
D ’ ye mind ! ” The dog growl again ; and lick his lip , eye Oliver a if he be anxious to attach himself to his windpipe without delay .
“ He ’ s as willing a a Christian , strike me blind if he isn ’ t ! ” say Sikes , regard the animal with a kind of grim and ferocious approval .
“ Now , you know what you ’ ve get to expect , master , so call away as quick a you like ; the dog will soon stop that game .
Get on , young ’ un ! ” Bull ’ s-eye wag his tail in acknowledgment of this unusually endear form of speech ; and , give vent to another admonitory growl for the benefit of Oliver , lead the way onward .
It be Smithfield that they be cross , although it might have be Grosvenor Square , for anything Oliver know to the contrary .
The night be dark and foggy .
The light in the shop could scarecely struggle through the heavy mist , which thicken every moment and shroud the street and house in gloom ; render the strange place still stranger in Oliver ’ s eye ; and make his uncertainty the more dismal and depressing .
They have hurry on a few pace , when a deep church-bell strike the hour .
With it first stroke , his two conductor stop , and turn their head in the direction whence the sound proceed .
“ Eight o ’ clock , Bill , ” say Nancy , when the bell cease .
“ What ’ s the good of tell me that ; I can hear it , can ’ t I ! ” reply Sikes .
“ I wonder whether _they_ can hear it , ” say Nancy .
“ Of course they can , ” replied Sikes .
“ It be Bartlemy time when I be shop ; and there warn ’ t a penny trumpet in the fair , a I couldn ’ t hear the squeaking on .
Arter I be lock up for the night , the row and din outside make the thunder old jail so silent , that I could almost have beat my brain out against the iron plate of the door. ” “ Poor fellow ! ” say Nancy , who still have her face turn towards the quarter in which the bell have sound .
“ Oh , Bill , such fine young chap a them ! ” “ Yes ; that ’ s all you woman think of , ” answer Sikes .
“ Fine young chap !
Well , they ’ re as good a dead , so it don ’ t much matter. ” With this consolation , Mr. Sikes appear to repress a rise tendency to jealousy , and , clasp Oliver ’ s wrist more firmly , tell him to step out again .
“ Wait a minute ! ” say the girl : “ I wouldn ’ t hurry by , if it be you that be come out to be hang , the next time eight o ’ clock strike , Bill .
I ’ d walk round and round the place till I drop , if the snow be on the ground , and I hadn ’ t a shawl to cover me. ” “ And what good would that do ? ” inquire the unsentimental Mr. Sikes .
“ Unless you could pitch over a file and twenty yard of good stout rope , you might as well be walk fifty mile off , or not walk at all , for all the good it would do me .
Come on , and don ’ t stand preach there. ” The girl burst into a laugh ; draw her shawl more closely round her ; and they walk away .
But Oliver felt her hand tremble , and , look up in her face a they pass a gas-lamp , saw that it have turn a deadly white .
They walk on , by little-frequented and dirty way , for a full half-hour : meeting very few people , and those appear from their look to hold much the same position in society a Mr. Sikes himself .
At length they turn into a very filthy narrow street , nearly full of old-clothes shop ; the dog run forward , a if conscious that there be no further occasion for his keep on guard , stop before the door of a shop that be close and apparently untenanted ; the house be in a ruinous condition , and on the door be nail a board , intimate that it be to let : which look a if it have hung there for many year .
“ All right , ” cry Sikes , glance cautiously about .
Nancy stoop below the shutter , and Oliver hear the sound of a bell .
They cross to the opposite side of the street , and stand for a few moment under a lamp .
A noise , a if a sash window be gently raise , be hear ; and soon afterwards the door softly open .
Mr. Sikes then seize the terrify boy by the collar with very little ceremony ; and all three be quickly inside the house .
The passage be perfectly dark .
They wait , while the person who have let them in , chain and bar the door .
“ Anybody here ? ” inquire Sikes .
“ No , ” reply a voice , which Oliver think he have hear before .
“ Is the old ’ un here ? ” ask the robber .
“ Yes , ” reply the voice , “ and precious down in the mouth he have be .
Won ’ t he be glad to see you ?
Oh , no ! ” The style of this reply , as well a the voice which deliver it , seem familiar to Oliver ’ s ear : but it be impossible to distinguish even the form of the speaker in the darkness .
“ Let ’ s have a glim , ” say Sikes , “ or we shall go break our neck , or tread on the dog .
Look after your leg if you do ! ” “ Stand still a moment , and I ’ ll get you one , ” reply the voice .
The recede footstep of the speaker be hear ; and , in another minute , the form of Mr. John Dawkins , otherwise the Artful Dodger , appear .
He bore in his right hand a tallow candle stick in the end of a cleft stick .
The young gentleman do not stop to bestow any other mark of recognition upon Oliver than a humourous grin ; but , turn away , beckon the visitor to follow him down a flight of stair .
They cross an empty kitchen ; and , open the door of a low earthy-smelling room , which seem to have be build in a small back-yard , be receive with a shout of laughter .
“ Oh , my wig , my wig ! ” cry Master Charles Bates , from whose lung the laughter have proceed : “ here he be !
oh , cry , here he be !
Oh , Fagin , look at him !
Fagin , do look at him !
I can ’ t bear it ; it be such a jolly game , I can ’ t bear it .
Hold me , somebody , while I laugh it out. ” With this irrepressible ebullition of mirth , Master Bates lay himself flat on the floor : and kick convulsively for five minute , in an ectasy of facetious joy .
Then jump to his foot , he snatch the cleft stick from the Dodger ; and , advance to Oliver , view him round and round ; while the Jew , take off his nightcap , make a great number of low bow to the bewilder boy .
The Artful , meantime , who be of a rather saturnine disposition , and seldom give way to merriment when it interfere with business , rifle Oliver ’ s pocket with steady assiduity .
“ Look at his togs , Fagin ! ” say Charley , put the light so close to his new jacket a nearly to set him on fire .
“ Look at his togs !
Superfine cloth , and the heavy swell cut !
Oh , my eye , what a game !
And his book , too !
Nothing but a gentleman , Fagin ! ” “ Delighted to see you look so well , my dear , ” say the Jew , bow with mock humility .
“ The Artful shall give you another suit , my dear , for fear you should spoil that Sunday one .
Why didn ’ t you write , my dear , and say you be come ?
We ’ d have get something warm for supper. ” At his , Master Bates roar again : so loud , that Fagin himself relaxed , and even the Dodger smile ; but a the Artful draw forth the five-pound note at that instant , it be doubtful whether the sally of the discovery awaken his merriment .
“ Hallo , what ’ s that ? ” inquired Sikes , step forward a the Jew seize the note .
“ That ’ s mine , Fagin. ” “ No , no , my dear , ” say the Jew .
“ Mine , Bill , mine .
You shall have the books. ” “ If that ain ’ t mine ! ” say Bill Sikes , put on his hat with a determined air ; “ mine and Nancy ’ s that be ; I ’ ll take the boy back again. ” The Jew start .
Oliver start too , though from a very different cause ; for he hop that the dispute might really end in his be take back .
“ Come !
Hand over , will you ? ” say Sikes .
“ This be hardly fair , Bill ; hardly fair , be it , Nancy ? ” inquire the Jew .
“ Fair , or not fair , ” retort Sikes , “ hand over , I tell you !
Do you think Nancy and me have get nothing else to do with our precious time but to spend it in scout arter , and kidnapping , every young boy a get grab through you ?
Give it here , you avaricious old skeleton , give it here ! ” With this gentle remonstrance , Mr. Sikes pluck the note from between the Jew ’ s finger and thumb ; and look the old man coolly in the face , fold it up small , and tie it in his neckerchief .
“ That ’ s for our share of the trouble , ” say Sikes ; “ and not half enough , neither .
You may keep the book , if you ’ re fond of reading .
If you ain ’ t , sell ’ em. ” “ They ’ re very pretty , ” say Charley Bates : who , with sundry grimace , have be affect to read one of the volume in question ; “ beautiful writing , isn ’ t be , Oliver ? ” At sight of the dismayed look with which Oliver regard his tormentor , Master Bates , who be bless with a lively sense of the ludicrous , fell into another ectasy , more boisterous than the first .
“ They belong to the old gentleman , ” say Oliver , wring his hand ; “ to the good , kind , old gentleman who take me into his house , and have me nurse , when I be near dying of the fever .
Oh , pray send them back ; send him back the book and money .
Keep me here all my life long ; but pray , pray send them back .
He ’ ll think I steal them ; the old lady : all of them who be so kind to me : will think I steal them .
Oh , do have mercy upon me , and send them back ! ” With these word , which be utter with all the energy of passionate grief , Oliver fell upon his knee at the Jew ’ s foot ; and beat his hand together , in perfect desperation .
“ The boy ’ s right , ” remark Fagin , look covertly round , and knit his shaggy eyebrows into a hard knot .
“ You ’ re right , Oliver , you ’ re right ; they _will_ think you have steal ’ em .
Ha !
ha ! ” chuckle the Jew , rub his hand , “ it couldn ’ t have happen well , if we have choose our time ! ” “ Of course it couldn ’ t , ” reply Sikes ; “ I know ’ d that , directly I see him come through Clerkenwell , with the book under his arm .
It ’ s all right enough .
They ’ re soft-hearted psalm-singers , or they wouldn ’ t have take him in at all ; and they ’ ll ask no question after him , fear they should be oblige to prosecute , and so get him lag .
He ’ s safe enough. ” Oliver have look from one to the other , while these word be be speak , a if he be bewilder , and could scarecely understand what pass ; but when Bill Sikes conclude , he jump suddenly to his foot , and tore wildly from the room : uttering shriek for help , which make the bare old house echo to the roof .
“ Keep back the dog , Bill ! ” cry Nancy , spring before the door , and close it , a the Jew and his two pupil dart out in pursuit .
“ Keep back the dog ; he ’ ll tear the boy to pieces. ” “ Serve him right ! ” cried Sikes , struggle to disengage himself from the girl ’ s grasp .
“ Stand off from me , or I ’ ll split your head against the wall. ” “ I don ’ t care for that , Bill , I don ’ t care for that , ” scream the girl , struggle violently with the man , “ the child shan ’ t be tear down by the dog , unless you kill me first. ” “ Shan ’ t he ! ” say Sikes , set his teeth .
“ I ’ ll soon do that , if you don ’ t keep off. ” The housebreaker fling the girl from him to the further end of the room , just a the Jew and the two boy return , drag Oliver among them .
“ What ’ s the matter here ! ” say Fagin , look round .
“ The girl ’ s go mad , I think , ” replied Sikes , savagely .
“ No , she hasn ’ t , ” say Nancy , pale and breathless from the scuffle ; “ no , she hasn ’ t , Fagin ; don ’ t think it. ” “ Then keep quiet , will you ? ” say the Jew , with a threatening look .
“ No , I win ’ t do that , neither , ” reply Nancy , speak very loud .
“ Come !
What do you think of that ? ” Mr. Fagin be sufficiently well acquaint with the manner and custom of that particular specie of humanity to which Nancy belong , to feel tolerably certain that it would be rather unsafe to prolong any conversation with her , at present .
With the view of divert the attention of the company , he turn to Oliver .
“ So you want to get away , my dear , do you ? ” say the Jew , take up a jagged and knot club which lay in a corner of the fireplace ; “ eh ? ” Oliver make no reply .
But he watch the Jew ’ s motion , and breathe quickly .
“ Wanted to get assistance ; call for the police ; do you ? ” sneer the Jew , catch the boy by the arm .
“ We ’ ll cure you of that , my young master. ” The Jew inflict a smart blow on Oliver ’ s shoulder with the club ; and be raise it for a second , when the girl , rush forward , wrest it from his hand .
She fling it into the fire , with a force that bring some of the glowing coal whirl out into the room .
“ I win ’ t stand by and see it do , Fagin , ” cry the girl .
“ You ’ ve get the boy , and what more would you have ? —Let him be—let him be—or I shall put that mark on some of you , that will bring me to the gallows before my time. ” The girl stamp her foot violently on the floor a she vent this threat ; and with her lip compress , and her hand clench , look alternately at the Jew and the other robber : her face quite colourless from the passion of rage into which she have gradually work herself .
“ Why , Nancy ! ” say the Jew , in a soothing tone ; after a pause , during which he and Mr. Sikes have star at one another in a disconcerted manner ; “ you , —you ’ re more clever than ever to-night .
Ha !
ha !
my dear , you be act beautifully. ” “ Am I ! ” say the girl .
“ Take care I don ’ t overdo it .
You will be the bad for it , Fagin , if I do ; and so I tell you in good time to keep clear of me. ” There be something about a roused woman : especially if she add to all her other strong passion , the fierce impulse of recklessness and despair ; which few men like to provoke .
The Jew saw that it would be hopeless to affect any further mistake regard the reality of Miss Nancy ’ s rage ; and , shrink involuntarily back a few pace , cast a glance , half imploring and half cowardly , at Sikes : a if to hint that he be the fit person to pursue the dialogue .
Mr. Sikes , thus mutely appealed to ; and possibly feel his personal pride and influence interested in the immediate reduction of Miss Nancy to reason ; give utterance to about a couple of score of curse and threat , the rapid production of which reflect great credit on the fertility of his invention .
As they produce no visible effect on the object against whom they be discharge , however , he resort to more tangible argument .
“ What do you mean by this ? ” say Sikes ; back the inquiry with a very common imprecation concern the most beautiful of human feature : which , if it be hear above , only once out of every fifty thousand time that it be uttered below , would render blindness a common a disorder a measles : “ what do you mean by it ?
Burn my body !
Do you know who you be , and what you be ? ” “ Oh , yes , I know all about it , ” reply the girl , laugh hysterically ; and shake her head from side to side , with a poor assumption of indifference .
“ Well , then , keep quiet , ” rejoin Sikes , with a growl like that he be accustom to use when address his dog , “ or I ’ ll quiet you for a good long time to come. ” The girl laugh again : even less composedly than before ; and , dart a hasty look at Sikes , turn her face aside , and bite her lip till the blood come .
“ You ’ re a nice one , ” added Sikes , a he survey her with a contemptuous air , “ to take up the humane and gen—teel side !
A pretty subject for the child , a you call him , to make a friend of ! ” “ God Almighty help me , I be ! ” cry the girl passionately ; “ and I wish I have be strike dead in the street , or have change place with them we pass so near to-night , before I have lent a hand in bring him here .
He ’ s a thief , a liar , a devil , all that ’ s bad , from this night forth .
Isn ’ t that enough for the old wretch , without blow ? ” “ Come , come , Sikes , ” say the Jew appeal to him in a remonstratory tone , and motion towards the boy , who be eagerly attentive to all that pass ; “ we must have civil word ; civil word , Bill. ” “ Civil word ! ” cry the girl , whose passion be frightful to see .
“ Civil word , you villain !
Yes , you deserve ’ em from me .
I thieve for you when I be a child not half as old a this ! ” point to Oliver .
“ I have be in the same trade , and in the same service , for twelve year since .
Don ’ t you know it ?
Speak out !
Don ’ t you know it ? ” “ Well , well , ” reply the Jew , with an attempt at pacification ; “ and , if you have , it ’ s your living ! ” “ Aye , it be ! ” return the girl ; not speak , but pour out the word in one continuous and vehement scream .
“ It be my living ; and the cold , wet , dirty street be my home ; and you ’ re the wretch that drive me to them long ago , and that ’ ll keep me there , day and night , day and night , till I die ! ” “ I shall do you a mischief ! ” interpose the Jew , goad by these reproach ; “ a mischief bad than that , if you say much more ! ” The girl say nothing more ; but , tear her hair and dress in a transport of passion , make such a rush at the Jew a would probably have leave signal mark of her revenge upon him , have not her wrist be seize by Sikes at the right moment ; upon which , she make a few ineffectual struggle , and faint .
“ She ’ s all right now , ” say Sikes , lay her down in a corner .
“ She ’ s uncommon strong in the arm , when she ’ s up in this way. ” The Jew wipe his forehead : and smile , a if it be a relief to have the disturbance over ; but neither he , nor Sikes , nor the dog , nor the boy , seem to consider it in any other light than a common occurance incidental to business .
“ It ’ s the bad of have to do with woman , ” say the Jew , replace his club ; “ but they ’ re clever , and we can ’ t get on , in our line , without ’ em .
Charley , show Oliver to bed. ” “ I suppose he ’ d well not wear his best clothes tomorrow , Fagin , have he ? ” inquire Charley Bates .
“ Certainly not , ” reply the Jew , reciprocate the grin with which Charley put the question .
Master Bates , apparently much delight with his commission , take the cleft stick : and lead Oliver into an adjacent kitchen , where there be two or three of the bed on which he have sleep before ; and here , with many uncontrollable burst of laughter , he produce the identical old suit of clothes which Oliver have so much congratulate himself upon leave off at Mr. Brownlow ’ s ; and the accidental display of which , to Fagin , by the Jew who purchase them , have be the very first clue receive , of his whereabout .
“ Put off the smart one , ” say Charley , “ and I ’ ll give ’ em to Fagin to take care of .
What fun it be ! ” Poor Oliver unwillingly comply .
Master Bates roll up the new clothes under his arm , depart from the room , leave Oliver in the dark , and lock the door behind him .
The noise of Charley ’ s laughter , and the voice of Miss Betsy , who opportunely arrive to throw water over her friend , and perform other feminine office for the promotion of her recovery , might have keep many people awake under more happy circumstance than those in which Oliver be place .
But he be sick and weary ; and he soon fell sound asleep .
CHAPTER XVII .
OLIVER ’ S DESTINY CONTINUING UNPROPITIOUS , BRINGS A GREAT MAN TO LONDON TO INJURE HIS REPUTATION It be the custom on the stage , in all good murderous melodrama , to present the tragic and the comic scene , in a regular alternation , a the layer of red and white in a side of streaky bacon .
The hero sink upon his straw bed , weigh down by fetter and misfortune ; in the next scene , his faithful but unconscious squire regale the audience with a comic song .
We behold , with throb bosom , the heroine in the grasp of a proud and ruthless baron : her virtue and her life alike in danger , draw forth her dagger to preserve the one at the cost of the other ; and just a our expectation be work up to the high pitch , a whistle be hear , and we be straightway transport to the great hall of the castle ; where a grey-headed seneschal sing a funny chorus with a funny body of vassal , who be free of all sort of place , from church vault to palace , and roam about in company , carol perpetually .
Such change appear absurd ; but they be not so unnatural a they would seem at first sight .
The transition in real life from well-spread board to death-beds , and from mourning-weeds to holiday garment , be not a whit less startling ; only , there , we be busy actor , instead of passive lookers-on , which make a vast difference .
The actor in the mimic life of the theatre , be blind to violent transition and abrupt impulse of passion or feeling , which , present before the eye of mere spectator , be at once condemn a outrageous and preposterous .
As sudden shifting of the scene , and rapid change of time and place , be not only sanction in book by long usage , but be by many consider a the great art of authorship : an author ’ s skill in his craft be , by such critic , chiefly estimate with relation to the dilemma in which he leave his character at the end of every chapter : this brief introduction to the present one may perhaps be deem unnecessary .
If so , let it be consider a delicate intimation on the part of the historian that he be go back to the town in which Oliver Twist be bear ; the reader take it for grant that there be good and substantial reason for make the journey , or he would not be invite to proceed upon such an expedition .
Mr. Bumble emerge at early morning from the workhouse-gate , and walk with portly carriage and commanding step , up the High Street .
He be in the full bloom and pride of beadlehood ; his cock hat and coat be dazzle in the morning sun ; he clutch his cane with the vigorous tenacity of health and power .
Mr. Bumble always carry his head high ; but this morning it be high than usual .
There be an abstraction in his eye , an elevation in his air , which might have warn an observant stranger that thought be pass in the beadle ’ s mind , too great for utterance .
Mr. Bumble stop not to converse with the small shopkeeper and others who speak to him , deferentially , a he pass along .
He merely return their salutation with a wave of his hand , and relax not in his dignified pace , until he reach the farm where Mrs. Mann tend the infant pauper with parochial care .
“ Drat that beadle ! ” say Mrs. Mann , hear the well-known shaking at the garden-gate .
“ If it isn ’ t him at this time in the morning !
Lauk , Mr. Bumble , only think of it be you !
Well , dear me , it _is_ a pleasure , this be !
Come into the parlour , sir , please. ” The first sentence be address to Susan ; and the exclamation of delight be utter to Mr. Bumble : a the good lady unlock the garden-gate : and show him , with great attention and respect , into the house .
“ Mrs .
Mann , ” say Mr. Bumble ; not sit upon , or drop himself into a seat , a any common jackanapes would : but let himself gradually and slowly down into a chair ; “ Mrs .
Mann , ma ’ be , good morning. ” “ Well , and good morning to _you_ , sir , ” reply Mrs. Mann , with many smile ; “ and hop you find yourself well , sir ! ” “ So-so , Mrs. Mann , ” reply the beadle .
“ A porochial life be not a bed of rose , Mrs. Mann. ” “ Ah , that it isn ’ t indeed , Mr. Bumble , ” rejoin the lady .
And all the infant pauper might have chorus the rejoinder with great propriety , if they have hear it .
“ A porochial life , ma ’ be , ” continue Mr. Bumble , strike the table with his cane , “ be a life of worrit , and vexation , and hardihood ; but all public character , a I may say , must suffer prosecution. ” Mrs. Mann , not very well know what the beadle meant , raise her hand with a look of sympathy , and sigh .
“ Ah !
You may well sigh , Mrs. Mann ! ” say the beadle .
Finding she have do right , Mrs. Mann sigh again : evidently to the satisfaction of the public character : who , repress a complacent smile by look sternly at his cocked hat , say , “ Mrs .
Mann , I be go to London. ” “ Lauk , Mr. Bumble ! ” cry Mrs. Mann , start back .
“ To London , ma ’ be , ” resume the inflexible beadle , “ by coach .
I and two pauper , Mrs. Mann !
A legal action be a come on , about a settlement ; and the board have appoint me—me , Mrs. Mann—to dispose to the matter before the quarter-sessions at Clerkinwell .
And I very much question , ” add Mr. Bumble , draw himself up , “ whether the Clerkinwell Sessions will not find themselves in the wrong box before they have do with me. ” “ Oh !
you mustn ’ t be too hard upon them , sir , ” say Mrs. Mann , coaxingly .
“ The Clerkinwell Sessions have bring it upon themselves , ma ’ be , ” reply Mr. Bumble ; “ and if the Clerkinwell Sessions find that they come off rather bad than they expect , the Clerkinwell Sessions have only themselves to thank. ” There be so much determination and depth of purpose about the menacing manner in which Mr. Bumble deliver himself of these word , that Mrs. Mann appear quite awe by them .
At length she say , “ You ’ re go by coach , sir ?
I think it be always usual to send them pauper in carts. ” “ That ’ s when they ’ re ill , Mrs. Mann , ” say the beadle .
“ We put the sick pauper into open cart in the rainy weather , to prevent their take cold. ” “ Oh ! ” say Mrs. Mann .
“ The opposition coach contract for these two ; and take them cheap , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ They be both in a very low state , and we find it would come two pound cheap to move ’ em than to bury ’ em—that be , if we can throw ’ em upon another parish , which I think we shall be able to do , if they don ’ t die upon the road to spite u .
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” When Mr. Bumble have laugh a little while , his eye again encounter the cocked hat ; and he become grave .
“ We be forget business , ma ’ be , ” say the beadle ; “ here be your porochial stipend for the month. ” Mr. Bumble produce some silver money roll up in paper , from his pocket-book ; and request a receipt : which Mrs. Mann write .
“ It ’ s very much blot , sir , ” say the farmer of infant ; “ but it ’ s formal enough , I dare say .
Thank you , Mr. Bumble , sir , I be very much oblige to you , I ’ m sure. ” Mr. Bumble nod , blandly , in acknowledgment of Mrs. Mann ’ s curtsey ; and inquire how the child be .
“ Bless their dear little heart ! ” say Mrs. Mann with emotion , “ they ’ re as well a can be , the dear !
Of course , except the two that die last week .
And little Dick. ” “ Isn ’ t that boy no good ? ” inquire Mr. Bumble .
Mrs. Mann shake her head .
“ He ’ s a ill-conditioned , wicious , bad-disposed porochial child that , ” say Mr. Bumble angrily .
“ Where be he ? ” “ I ’ ll bring him to you in one minute , sir , ” reply Mrs. Mann .
“ Here , you Dick ! ” After some call , Dick be discover .
Having have his face put under the pump , and dry upon Mrs. Mann ’ s gown , he be lead into the awful presence of Mr. Bumble , the beadle .
The child be pale and thin ; his cheek be sink ; and his eye large and bright .
The scanty parish dress , the livery of his misery , hung loosely on his feeble body ; and his young limb have waste away , like those of an old man .
Such be the little be who stand tremble beneath Mr. Bumble ’ s glance ; not dare to lift his eye from the floor ; and dread even to hear the beadle ’ s voice .
“ Can ’ t you look at the gentleman , you obstinate boy ? ” say Mrs. Mann .
The child meekly raise his eye , and encounter those of Mr. Bumble .
“ What ’ s the matter with you , porochial Dick ? ” inquire Mr. Bumble , with well-timed jocularity .
“ Nothing , sir , ” reply the child faintly .
“ I should think not , ” say Mrs. Mann , who have of course laugh very much at Mr. Bumble ’ s humour .
“ You want for nothing , I ’ m sure. ” “ I should like— ” falter the child .
“ Hey-day ! ” interpose Mrs. Mann , “ I suppose you ’ re go to say that you _do_ want for something , now ?
Why , you little wretch— ” “ Stop , Mrs. Mann , stop ! ” say the beadle , raise his hand with a show of authority .
“ Like what , sir , eh ? ” “ I should like , ” falter the child , “ if somebody that can write , would put a few word down for me on a piece of paper , and fold it up and seal it , and keep it for me , after I be lay in the ground. ” “ Why , what do the boy mean ? ” exclaim Mr. Bumble , on whom the earnest manner and wan aspect of the child have make some impression : accustom a he be to such thing .
“ What do you mean , sir ? ” “ I should like , ” say the child , “ to leave my dear love to poor Oliver Twist ; and to let him know how often I have sit by myself and cry to think of his wander about in the dark night with nobody to help him .
And I should like to tell him , ” say the child press his small hand together , and speak with great fervour , “ that I be glad to die when I be very young ; for , perhaps , if I have live to be a man , and have grow old , my little sister who be in Heaven , might forget me , or be unlike me ; and it would be so much happy if we be both child there together. ” Mr. Bumble survey the little speaker , from head to foot , with indescribable astonishment ; and , turn to his companion , say , “ They ’ re all in one story , Mrs. Mann .
That out-dacious Oliver have demogalized them all ! ” “ I couldn ’ t have believe it , sir ” say Mrs Mann , hold up her hand , and look malignantly at Dick .
“ I never see such a hardened little wretch ! ” “ Take him away , ma ’ be ! ” say Mr. Bumble imperiously .
“ This must be state to the board , Mrs. Mann. ” “ I hope the gentleman will understand that it isn ’ t my fault , sir ? ” say Mrs. Mann , whimper pathetically .
“ They shall understand that , ma ’ be ; they shall be acquaint with the true state of the case , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ There ; take him away , I can ’ t bear the sight on him. ” Dick be immediately take away , and lock up in the coal-cellar .
Mr. Bumble shortly afterwards take himself off , to prepare for his journey .
At six o ’ clock next morning , Mr. Bumble : have exchange his cocked hat for a round one , and encase his person in a blue great-coat with a cape to it : take his place on the outside of the coach , accompany by the criminal whose settlement be dispute ; with whom , in due course of time , he arrive in London .
He experience no other cross on the way , than those which originate in the perverse behaviour of the two pauper , who persist in shivering , and complaining of the cold , in a manner which , Mr. Bumble declare , cause his teeth to chatter in his head , and make him feel quite uncomfortable ; although he have a great-coat on .
Having dispose of these evil-minded person for the night , Mr. Bumble sit himself down in the house at which the coach stop ; and take a temperate dinner of steak , oyster sauce , and porter .
Putting a glass of hot gin-and-water on the chimney-piece , he draw his chair to the fire ; and , with sundry moral reflection on the too-prevalent sin of discontent and complaining , compose himself to read the paper .
The very first paragraph upon which Mr. Bumble ’ s eye rest , be the following advertisement .
“ FIVE GUINEAS REWARD “ Whereas a young boy , name Oliver Twist , abscond , or be entice , on Thursday even last , from his home , at Pentonville ; and have not since be heard of .
The above reward will be pay to any person who will give such information a will lead to the discovery of the say Oliver Twist , or tend to throw any light upon his previous history , in which the advertiser be , for many reason , warmly interested. ” And then follow a full description of Oliver ’ s dress , person , appearance , and disappearance : with the name and address of Mr. Brownlow at full length .
Mr. Bumble open his eye ; read the advertisement , slowly and carefully , three several time ; and in something more than five minute be on his way to Pentonville : have actually , in his excitement , leave the glass of hot gin-and-water , untasted .
“ Is Mr. Brownlow at home ? ” inquire Mr. Bumble of the girl who open the door .
To this inquiry the girl return the not uncommon , but rather evasive reply of “ I don ’ t know ; where do you come from ? ” Mr. Bumble no sooner utter Oliver ’ s name , in explanation of his errand , than Mrs. Bedwin , who have be listen at the parlour door , hasten into the passage in a breathless state .
“ Come in , come in , ” say the old lady : “ I know we should hear of him .
Poor dear !
I know we should !
I be certain of it .
Bless his heart !
I say so all along. ” Having heard this , the worthy old lady hurry back into the parlour again ; and seat herself on a sofa , burst into tear .
The girl , who be not quite so susceptible , have run upstairs meanwhile ; and now return with a request that Mr. Bumble would follow her immediately : which he do .
He be show into the little back study , where sit Mr. Brownlow and his friend Mr. Grimwig , with decanter and glass before them .
The latter gentleman at once burst into the exclamation : “ A beadle .
A parish beadle , or I ’ ll eat my head. ” “ Pray don ’ t interrupt just now , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ Take a seat , will you ? ” Mr. Bumble sit himself down ; quite confound by the oddity of Mr. Grimwig ’ s manner .
Mr. Brownlow move the lamp , so a to obtain an uninterrupted view of the beadle ’ s countenance ; and say , with a little impatience , “ Now , sir , you come in consequence of have see the advertisement ? ” “ Yes , sir , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ And you ARE a beadle , be you not ? ” inquire Mr. Grimwig .
“ I be a porochial beadle , gentleman , ” rejoin Mr. Bumble proudly .
“ Of course , ” observed Mr. Grimwig aside to his friend , “ I know he be .
A beadle all over ! ” Mr. Brownlow gently shake his head to impose silence on his friend , and resume : “ Do you know where this poor boy be now ? ” “ No more than nobody , ” reply Mr. Bumble .
“ Well , what _do_ you know of him ? ” inquire the old gentleman .
“ Speak out , my friend , if you have anything to say .
What _do_ you know of him ? ” “ You don ’ t happen to know any good of him , do you ? ” say Mr. Grimwig , caustically ; after an attentive perusal of Mr. Bumble ’ s feature .
Mr. Bumble , catch at the inquiry very quickly , shake his head with portentous solemnity .
“ You see ? ” say Mr. Grimwig , look triumphantly at Mr. Brownlow .
Mr. Brownlow look apprehensively at Mr. Bumble ’ s pursed-up countenance ; and request him to communicate what he know regard Oliver , in a few word a possible .
Mr. Bumble put down his hat ; unbutton his coat ; fold his arm ; incline his head in a retrospective manner ; and , after a few moment ’ reflection , commence his story .
It would be tedious if give in the beadle ’ s word : occupying , a it do , some twenty minute in the telling ; but the sum and substance of it be , that Oliver be a foundling , bear of low and vicious parent .
That he have , from his birth , display no good quality than treachery , ingratitude , and malice .
That he have terminate his brief career in the place of his birth , by make a sanguinary and cowardly attack on an unoffending lad , and run away in the night-time from his master ’ s house .
In proof of his really be the person he represent himself , Mr. Bumble lay upon the table the paper he have bring to town .
Folding his arm again , he then await Mr. Brownlow ’ s observation .
“ I fear it be all too true , ” say the old gentleman sorrowfully , after look over the paper .
“ This be not much for your intelligence ; but I would gladly have give you treble the money , if it have be favourable to the boy. ” It be not improbable that if Mr. Bumble have be possess of this information at an early period of the interview , he might have impart a very different colour to his little history .
It be too late to do it now , however ; so he shake his head gravely , and , pocket the five guinea , withdrew .
Mr. Brownlow pace the room to and fro for some minute ; evidently so much disturb by the beadle ’ s tale , that even Mr. Grimwig forbear to vex him far .
At length he stop , and ring the bell violently .
“ Mrs .
Bedwin , ” say Mr. Brownlow , when the housekeeper appear ; “ that boy , Oliver , be an imposter. ” “ It can ’ t be , sir .
It can not be , ” say the old lady energetically .
“ I tell you he be , ” retort the old gentleman .
“ What do you mean by can ’ t be ?
We have just hear a full account of him from his birth ; and he have be a thorough-paced little villain , all his life. ” “ I never will believe it , sir , ” reply the old lady , firmly .
“ Never ! ” “ You old woman never believe anything but quack-doctors , and lie story-books , ” growl Mr. Grimwig .
“ I know it all along .
Why didn ’ t you take my advise in the beginning ; you would if he hadn ’ t have a fever , I suppose , eh ?
He be interest , wasn ’ t he ?
Interesting !
Bah ! ” And Mr. Grimwig poke the fire with a flourish .
“ He be a dear , grateful , gentle child , sir , ” retort Mrs. Bedwin , indignantly .
“ I know what child be , sir ; and have do these forty year ; and people who can ’ t say the same , shouldn ’ t say anything about them .
That ’ s my opinion ! ” This be a hard hit at Mr. Grimwig , who be a bachelor .
As it extort nothing from that gentleman but a smile , the old lady toss her head , and smooth down her apron preparatory to another speech , when she be stop by Mr. Brownlow .
“ Silence ! ” say the old gentleman , feign an anger he be far from feel .
“ Never let me hear the boy ’ s name again .
I ring to tell you that .
Never .
Never , on any pretence , mind !
You may leave the room , Mrs. Bedwin .
Remember !
I be in earnest. ” There be sad heart at Mr. Brownlow ’ s that night .
Oliver ’ s heart sank within him , when he think of his good friend ; it be well for him that he could not know what they have hear , or it might have break outright .
CHAPTER XVIII .
HOW OLIVER PASSED HIS TIME IN THE IMPROVING SOCIETY OF HIS REPUTABLE FRIENDS About noon next day , when the Dodger and Master Bates have go out to pursue their customary avocation , Mr. Fagin take the opportunity of read Oliver a long lecture on the cry sin of ingratitude ; of which he clearly demonstrate he have be guilty , to no ordinary extent , in wilfully absent himself from the society of his anxious friend ; and , still more , in endeavour to escape from them after so much trouble and expense have be incur in his recovery .
Mr. Fagin lay great stress on the fact of his have take Oliver in , and cherish him , when , without his timely aid , he might have perish with hunger ; and he relate the dismal and affect history of a young lad whom , in his philanthropy , he have succour under parallel circumstance , but who , prove unworthy of his confidence and evince a desire to communicate with the police , have unfortunately come to be hang at the Old Bailey one morning .
Mr. Fagin do not seek to conceal his share in the catastrophe , but lament with tear in his eye that the wrong-headed and treacherous behaviour of the young person in question , have render it necessary that he should become the victim of certain evidence for the crown : which , if it be not precisely true , be indispensably necessary for the safety of him ( Mr. Fagin ) and a few select friend .
Mr. Fagin conclude by draw a rather disagreeable picture of the discomfort of hanging ; and , with great friendliness and politeness of manner , express his anxious hope that he might never be oblige to submit Oliver Twist to that unpleasant operation .
Little Oliver ’ s blood ran cold , a he listen to the Jew ’ s word , and imperfectly comprehend the dark threat convey in them .
That it be possible even for justice itself to confound the innocent with the guilty when they be in accidental companionship , he know already ; and that deeply-laid plan for the destruction of inconveniently know or over-communicative person , have be really devise and carry out by the Jew on more occasion than one , he think by no mean unlikely , when he recollect the general nature of the altercation between that gentleman and Mr. Sikes : which seem to bear reference to some foregone conspiracy of the kind .
As he glance timidly up , and meet the Jew ’ s search look , he felt that his pale face and tremble limb be neither unnoticed nor unrelished by that wary old gentleman .
The Jew , smile hideously , pat Oliver on the head , and say , that if he keep himself quiet , and apply himself to business , he saw they would be very good friend yet .
Then , take his hat , and cover himself with an old patched great-coat , he go out , and lock the room-door behind him .
And so Oliver remain all that day , and for the great part of many subsequent day , see nobody , between early morning and midnight , and leave during the long hour to commune with his own thought .
Which , never fail to revert to his kind friend , and the opinion they must long ago have form of him , be sad indeed .
After the lapse of a week or so , the Jew leave the room-door unlocked ; and he be at liberty to wander about the house .
It be a very dirty place .
The room upstairs have great high wooden chimney-pieces and large door , with panelled wall and cornice to the ceiling ; which , although they be black with neglect and dust , be ornament in various way .
From all of these token Oliver conclude that a long time ago , before the old Jew be bear , it have belong to well people , and have perhaps be quite gay and handsome : dismal and dreary a it look now .
Spiders have build their web in the angle of the wall and ceiling ; and sometimes , when Oliver walk softly into a room , the mouse would scamper across the floor , and run back terrify to their hole .
With these exception , there be neither sight nor sound of any living thing ; and often , when it grow dark , and he be tire of wander from room to room , he would crouch in the corner of the passage by the street-door , to be a near living people a he could ; and would remain there , listen and count the hour , until the Jew or the boy return .
In all the room , the mouldering shutter be fast close : the bar which hold them be screw tight into the wood ; the only light which be admit , steal it way through round hole at the top : which make the room more gloomy , and fill them with strange shadow .
There be a back-garret window with rusty bar outside , which have no shutter ; and out of this , Oliver often gaze with a melancholy face for hour together ; but nothing be to be descry from it but a confused and crowded mass of housetop , blacken chimney , and gable-ends .
Sometimes , indeed , a grizzly head might be see , peer over the parapet-wall of a distant house ; but it be quickly withdrawn again ; and a the window of Oliver ’ s observatory be nail down , and dim with the rain and smoke of year , it be as much a he could do to make out the form of the different object beyond , without make any attempt to be see or hear , —which he have a much chance of be , a if he have live inside the ball of St. Paul ’ s Cathedral .
One afternoon , the Dodger and Master Bates be engage out that even , the first-named young gentleman take it into his head to evince some anxiety regard the decoration of his person ( to do him justice , this be by no mean an habitual weakness with him ) ; and , with this end and aim , he condescendingly command Oliver to assist him in his toilet , straightway .
Oliver be but too glad to make himself useful ; too happy to have some face , however bad , to look upon ; too desirous to conciliate those about him when he could honestly do so ; to throw any objection in the way of this proposal .
So he at once express his readiness ; and , kneel on the floor , while the Dodger sit upon the table so that he could take his foot in his lap , he apply himself to a process which Mr. Dawkins designate a “ japan his trotter-cases. ” The phrase , render into plain English , signifieth , clean his boot .
Whether it be the sense of freedom and independence which a rational animal may be suppose to feel when he sit on a table in an easy attitude smoke a pipe , swing one leg carelessly to and fro , and have his boot clean all the time , without even the past trouble of have take them off , or the prospective misery of put them on , to disturb his reflection ; or whether it be the goodness of the tobacco that soothe the feeling of the Dodger , or the mildness of the beer that mollify his thought ; he be evidently tincture , for the nonce , with a spice of romance and enthusiasm , foreign to his general nature .
He look down on Oliver , with a thoughtful countenance , for a brief space ; and then , raise his head , and heave a gentle sign , say , half in abstraction , and half to Master Bates : “ What a pity it be he isn ’ t a prig ! ” “ Ah ! ” say Master Charles Bates ; “ he don ’ t know what ’ s good for him. ” The Dodger sigh again , and resume his pipe : a do Charley Bates .
They both smoke , for some second , in silence .
“ I suppose you don ’ t even know what a prig be ? ” say the Dodger mournfully .
“ I think I know that , ” reply Oliver , look up .
“ It ’ s a the— ; you ’ re one , be you not ? ” inquired Oliver , check himself .
“ I be , ” reply the Dodger .
“ I ’ d scorn to be anything else. ” Mr. Dawkins give his hat a ferocious cock , after deliver this sentiment , and look at Master Bates , a if to denote that he would feel oblige by his say anything to the contrary .
“ I be , ” repeat the Dodger .
“ So ’ s Charley .
So ’ s Fagin .
So ’ s Sikes .
So ’ s Nancy .
So ’ s Bet .
So we all be , down to the dog .
And he ’ s the downy one of the lot ! ” “ And the least give to peach , ” add Charley Bates .
“ He wouldn ’ t so much a bark in a witness-box , for fear of commit himself ; no , not if you tie him up in one , and leave him there without wittles for a fortnight , ” say the Dodger .
“ Not a bit of it , ” observed Charley .
“ He ’ s a rum dog .
Don ’ t he look fierce at any strange cove that laugh or sings when he ’ s in company ! ” pursue the Dodger .
“ Won ’ t he growl at all , when he hear a fiddle playing !
And don ’ t he hate other dog a ain ’ t of his breed !
Oh , no ! ” “ He ’ s an out-and-out Christian , ” say Charley .
This be merely intend a a tribute to the animal ’ s ability , but it be an appropriate remark in another sense , if Master Bates have only know it ; for there be a good many lady and gentleman , claim to be out-and-out Christians , between whom , and Mr. Sikes ’ dog , there exist strong and singular point of resemblance .
“ Well , well , ” say the Dodger , recur to the point from which they have stray : with that mindfulness of his profession which influence all his proceeding .
“ This hasn ’ t go anything to do with young Green here. ” “ No more it have , ” say Charley .
“ Why don ’ t you put yourself under Fagin , Oliver ? ” “ And make your fortun ’ out of hand ? ” add the Dodger , with a grin .
“ And so be able to retire on your property , and do the gen-teel : a I mean to , in the very next leap-year but four that ever come , and the forty-second Tuesday in Trinity-week , ” say Charley Bates .
“ I don ’ t like it , ” rejoin Oliver , timidly ; “ I wish they would let me go .
I—I—would rather go. ” “ And Fagin would _rather_ not ! ” rejoin Charley .
Oliver know this too well ; but think it might be dangerous to express his feeling more openly , he only sigh , and go on with his boot-cleaning .
“ Go ! ” exclaim the Dodger .
“ Why , where ’ s your spirit ? ” Don ’ t you take any pride out of yourself ?
Would you go and be dependent on your friend ? ” “ Oh , blow that ! ” say Master Bates : draw two or three silk handkerchief from his pocket , and toss them into a cupboard , “ that ’ s too mean ; that is. ” “ _I_ couldn ’ t do it , ” say the Dodger , with an air of haughty disgust .
“ You can leave your friend , though , ” say Oliver with a half smile ; “ and let them be punish for what you did. ” “ That , ” rejoin the Dodger , with a wave of his pipe , “ That be all out of consideration for Fagin , ’ cause the trap know that we work together , and he might have get into trouble if we hadn ’ t make our lucky ; that be the move , wasn ’ t it , Charley ? ” Master Bates nod assent , and would have speak , but the recollection of Oliver ’ s flight come so suddenly upon him , that the smoke he be inhale get entangle with a laugh , and go up into his head , and down into his throat : and bring on a fit of cough and stamping , about five minute long .
“ Look here ! ” say the Dodger , draw forth a handful of shilling and halfpenny .
“ Here ’ s a jolly life !
What ’ s the odds where it come from ?
Here , catch hold ; there ’ s plenty more where they be take from .
You win ’ t , win ’ t you ?
Oh , you precious flat ! ” “ It ’ s naughty , ain ’ t it , Oliver ? ” inquire Charley Bates .
“ He ’ ll come to be scrag , win ’ t he ? ” “ I don ’ t know what that mean , ” reply Oliver .
“ Something in this way , old feller , ” say Charly .
As he say it , Master Bates catch up an end of his neckerchief ; and , hold it erect in the air , drop his head on his shoulder , and jerk a curious sound through his teeth ; thereby indicate , by a lively pantomimic representation , that scrag and hang be one and the same thing .
“ That ’ s what it mean , ” say Charley .
“ Look how he star , Jack !
I never do see such prime company a that ’ ere boy ; he ’ ll be the death of me , I know he will. ” Master Charley Bates , have laugh heartily again , resume his pipe with tear in his eye .
“ You ’ ve be bring up bad , ” say the Dodger , survey his boot with much satisfaction when Oliver have polish them .
“ Fagin will make something of you , though , or you ’ ll be the first he ever have that turn out unprofitable .
You ’ d good begin at once ; for you ’ ll come to the trade long before you think of it ; and you ’ re only lose time , Oliver. ” Master Bates back this advice with sundry moral admonition of his own : which , be exhaust , he and his friend Mr. Dawkins launch into a glowing description of the numerous pleasure incidental to the life they lead , intersperse with a variety of hint to Oliver that the best thing he could do , would be to secure Fagin ’ s favour without more delay , by the mean which they themselves have employ to gain it .
“ And always put this in your pipe , Nolly , ” say the Dodger , a the Jew be hear unlock the door above , “ if you don ’ t take fogels and tickers— ” “ What ’ s the good of talk in that way ? ” interpose Master Bates ; “ he don ’ t know what you mean. ” “ If you don ’ t take pocket-handkechers and watch , ” say the Dodger , reduce his conversation to the level of Oliver ’ s capacity , “ some other cove will ; so that the cove that lose ’ em will be all the bad , and you ’ ll be all the bad , too , and nobody half a ha ’ p ’ orth the good , except the chap wot get them—and you ’ ve just as good a right to them a they have. ” “ To be sure , to be sure ! ” say the Jew , who have enter unseen by Oliver .
“ It all lie in a nutshell my dear ; in a nutshell , take the Dodger ’ s word for it .
Ha !
ha !
ha !
He understand the catechism of his trade. ” The old man rub his hand gleefully together , a he corroborate the Dodger ’ s reason in these term ; and chuckle with delight at his pupil ’ s proficiency .
The conversation proceed no farther at this time , for the Jew have return home accompany by Miss Betsy , and a gentleman whom Oliver have never see before , but who be accost by the Dodger a Tom Chitling ; and who , have linger on the stair to exchange a few gallantry with the lady , now make his appearance .
Mr. Chitling be older in year than the Dodger : have perhaps number eighteen winter ; but there be a degree of deference in his deportment towards that young gentleman which seem to indicate that he felt himself conscious of a slight inferiority in point of genius and professional aquirements .
He have small twinkling eye , and a pock-marked face ; wear a fur cap , a dark corduroy jacket , greasy fustian trouser , and an apron .
His wardrobe be , in truth , rather out of repair ; but he excuse himself to the company by state that his “ time ” be only out an hour before ; and that , in consequence of have wear the regimentals for six week past , he have not be able to bestow any attention on his private clothes .
Mr. Chitling add , with strong mark of irritation , that the new way of fumigating clothes up yonder be infernal unconstitutional , for it burnt hole in them , and there be no remedy against the County .
The same remark he consider to apply to the regulation mode of cut the hair : which he hold to be decidedly unlawful .
Mr. Chitling wind up his observation by state that he have not touch a drop of anything for forty-two moral long hard-working day ; and that he “ wish he might be bust if he warn ’ t as dry a a lime-basket. ” “ Where do you think the gentleman have come from , Oliver ? ” inquire the Jew , with a grin , a the other boy put a bottle of spirit on the table .
“ I—I—don ’ t know , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ Who ’ s that ? ” inquired Tom Chitling , cast a contemptuous look at Oliver .
“ A young friend of mine , my dear , ” reply the Jew .
“ He ’ s in luck , then , ” say the young man , with a meaning look at Fagin .
“ Never mind where I come from , young ’ un ; you ’ ll find your way there , soon enough , I ’ ll bet a crown ! ” At this sally , the boy laugh .
After some more joke on the same subject , they exchange a few short whisper with Fagin ; and withdraw .
After some word apart between the last comer and Fagin , they draw their chair towards the fire ; and the Jew , tell Oliver to come and sit by him , lead the conversation to the topic most calculated to interest his hearer .
These be , the great advantage of the trade , the proficiency of the Dodger , the amiability of Charley Bates , and the liberality of the Jew himself .
At length these subject display sign of be thoroughly exhaust ; and Mr. Chitling do the same : for the house of correction becomes fatigue after a week or two .
Miss Betsy accordingly withdraw ; and leave the party to their repose .
From this day , Oliver be seldom left alone ; but be place in almost constant communication with the two boy , who play the old game with the Jew every day : whether for their own improvement or Oliver ’ s , Mr. Fagin best knew .
At other time the old man would tell them story of robbery he have commit in his young day : mixed up with so much that be droll and curious , that Oliver could not help laugh heartily , and show that he be amuse in spite of all his good feeling .
In short , the wily old Jew have the boy in his toil .
Having prepare his mind , by solitude and gloom , to prefer any society to the companionship of his own sad thought in such a dreary place , he be now slowly instill into his soul the poison which he hop would blacken it , and change it hue for ever .
CHAPTER XIX .
IN WHICH A NOTABLE PLAN IS DISCUSSED AND DETERMINED ON It be a chill , damp , windy night , when the Jew : button his great-coat tight round his shrivelled body , and pull the collar up over his ear so as completely to obscure the low part of his face : emerge from his den .
He pause on the step a the door be lock and chain behind him ; and have listen while the boy make all secure , and until their retreating footstep be no longer audible , slink down the street as quickly a he could .
The house to which Oliver have be convey , be in the neighborhood of Whitechapel .
The Jew stop for an instant at the corner of the street ; and , glance suspiciously round , cross the road , and strike off in the direction of the Spitalfields .
The mud lay thick upon the stone , and a black mist hung over the street ; the rain fell sluggishly down , and everything felt cold and clammy to the touch .
It seem just the night when it befit such a be a the Jew to be abroad .
As he glide stealthily along , creep beneath the shelter of the wall and doorway , the hideous old man seem like some loathsome reptile , engender in the slime and darkness through which he move : crawling forth , by night , in search of some rich offal for a meal .
He keep on his course , through many winding and narrow way , until he reach Bethnal Green ; then , turn suddenly off to the left , he soon become involve in a maze of the mean and dirty street which abound in that close and densely-populated quarter .
The Jew be evidently too familiar with the ground he traverse to be at all bewilder , either by the darkness of the night , or the intricacy of the way .
He hurry through several alley and street , and at length turn into one , light only by a single lamp at the farther end .
At the door of a house in this street , he knock ; have exchange a few muttered word with the person who open it , he walk upstairs .
A dog growl a he touch the handle of a room-door ; and a man ’ s voice demand who be there .
“ Only me , Bill ; only me , my dear , ” say the Jew look in .
“ Bring in your body then , ” say Sikes .
“ Lie down , you stupid brute !
Don ’ t you know the devil when he ’ s get a great-coat on ? ” Apparently , the dog have be somewhat deceive by Mr. Fagin ’ s out garment ; for a the Jew unbutton it , and throw it over the back of a chair , he retire to the corner from which he have rise : wag his tail a he go , to show that he be as well satisfied a it be in his nature to be .
“ Well ! ” say Sikes .
“ Well , my dear , ” reply the Jew.— “ Ah !
Nancy. ” The latter recognition be utter with just enough of embarrassment to imply a doubt of it reception ; for Mr. Fagin and his young friend have not meet , since she have interfere in behalf of Oliver .
All doubt upon the subject , if he have any , be speedily remove by the young lady ’ s behaviour .
She take her foot off the fender , push back her chair , and bid Fagin draw up his , without say more about it : for it be a cold night , and no mistake .
“ It be cold , Nancy dear , ” say the Jew , a he warm his skinny hand over the fire .
“ It seem to go right through one , ” add the old man , touch his side .
“ It must be a piercer , if it find it way through your heart , ” say Mr. Sikes .
“ Give him something to drink , Nancy .
Burn my body , make haste !
It ’ s enough to turn a man ill , to see his lean old carcase shivering in that way , like a ugly ghost just rise from the grave. ” Nancy quickly bring a bottle from a cupboard , in which there be many : which , to judge from the diversity of their appearance , be fill with several kind of liquid .
Sikes pour out a glass of brandy , bid the Jew drink it off .
“ Quite enough , quite , thankye , Bill , ” reply the Jew , put down the glass after just set his lip to it .
“ What !
You ’ re afraid of our get the good of you , be you ? ” inquired Sikes , fix his eye on the Jew .
“ Ugh ! ” With a hoarse grunt of contempt , Mr. Sikes seize the glass , and throw the remainder of it content into the ash : a a preparatory ceremony to fill it again for himself : which he do at once .
The Jew glance round the room , a his companion toss down the second glassful ; not in curiousity , for he have see it often before ; but in a restless and suspicious manner habitual to him .
It be a meanly furnished apartment , with nothing but the content of the closet to induce the belief that it occupier be anything but a working man ; and with no more suspicious article display to view than two or three heavy bludgeon which stand in a corner , and a “ life-preserver ” that hung over the chimney-piece .
“ There , ” say Sikes , smack his lip .
“ Now I ’ m ready. ” “ For business ? ” inquire the Jew .
“ For business , ” reply Sikes ; “ so say what you ’ ve get to say. ” “ About the crib at Chertsey , Bill ? ” say the Jew , draw his chair forward , and speak in a very low voice .
“ Yes .
Wot about it ? ” inquired Sikes .
“ Ah !
you know what I mean , my dear , ” say the Jew .
“ He know what I mean , Nancy ; don ’ t he ? ” “ No , he don ’ t , ” sneer Mr. Sikes .
“ Or he win ’ t , and that ’ s the same thing .
Speak out , and call thing by their right name ; don ’ t sit there , wink and blinking , and talk to me in hint , a if you warn ’ t the very first that thought about the robbery .
Wot d ’ ye mean ? ” “ Hush , Bill , hush ! ” say the Jew , who have in vain attempt to stop this burst of indignation ; “ somebody will hear u , my dear .
Somebody will hear us. ” “ Let ’ em hear ! ” say Sikes ; “ I don ’ t care. ” But a Mr. Sikes _did_ care , on reflection , he drop his voice a he say the word , and grow calmer .
“ There , there , ” say the Jew , coaxingly .
“ It be only my caution , nothing more .
Now , my dear , about that crib at Chertsey ; when be it to be do , Bill , eh ?
When be it to be do ?
Such plate , my dear , such plate ! ” say the Jew : rub his hand , and elevate his eyebrow in a rapture of anticipation .
“ Not at all , ” reply Sikes coldly .
“ Not to be do at all ! ” echo the Jew , lean back in his chair .
“ No , not at all , ” rejoin Sikes .
“ At least it can ’ t be a put-up job , a we expected. ” “ Then it hasn ’ t be properly go about , ” say the Jew , turn pale with anger .
“ Don ’ t tell me ! ” “ But I will tell you , ” retort Sikes .
“ Who be you that ’ s not to be tell ?
I tell you that Toby Crackit have be hang about the place for a fortnight , and he can ’ t get one of the servant in line. ” “ Do you mean to tell me , Bill , ” say the Jew : softening a the other grow heat : “ that neither of the two men in the house can be get over ? ” “ Yes , I do mean to tell you so , ” reply Sikes .
“ The old lady have have ’ em these twenty year ; and if you be to give ’ em five hundred pound , they wouldn ’ t be in it. ” “ But do you mean to say , my dear , ” remonstrate the Jew , “ that the woman can ’ t be get over ? ” “ Not a bit of it , ” reply Sikes .
“ Not by flash Toby Crackit ? ” say the Jew incredulously .
“ Think what woman be , Bill , ” “ No ; not even by flash Toby Crackit , ” reply Sikes .
“ He say he ’ s worn sham whisker , and a canary waistcoat , the whole bless time he ’ s be loiter down there , and it ’ s all of no use. ” “ He should have try mustachio and a pair of military trouser , my dear , ” say the Jew .
“ So he do , ” rejoin Sikes , “ and they warn ’ t of no more use than the other plant. ” The Jew look blank at this information .
After ruminate for some minute with his chin sunk on his breast , he raise his head and say , with a deep sigh , that if flash Toby Crackit report aright , he fear the game be up .
“ And yet , ” say the old man , drop his hand on his knee , “ it ’ s a sad thing , my dear , to lose so much when we have set our heart upon it. ” “ So it be , ” say Mr. Sikes .
“ Worse luck ! ” A long silence ensue ; during which the Jew be plunge in deep thought , with his face wrinkle into an expression of villainy perfectly demoniacal .
Sikes eye him furtively from time to time .
Nancy , apparently fearful of irritate the housebreaker , sit with her eye fix upon the fire , a if she have be deaf to all that pass .
“ Fagin , ” say Sikes , abruptly break the stillness that prevail ; “ be it worth fifty shiner extra , if it ’ s safely do from the outside ? ” “ Yes , ” say the Jew , a suddenly rouse himself .
“ Is it a bargain ? ” inquire Sikes .
“ Yes , my dear , yes , ” rejoin the Jew ; his eye glisten , and every muscle in his face work , with the excitement that the inquiry have awaken .
“ Then , ” say Sikes , thrust aside the Jew ’ s hand , with some disdain , “ let it come off as soon a you like .
Toby and me be over the garden-wall the night afore last , sound the panel of the door and shutter .
The crib ’ s bar up at night like a jail ; but there ’ s one part we can crack , safe and softly. ” “ Which be that , Bill ? ” ask the Jew eagerly .
“ Why , ” whisper Sikes , “ a you cross the lawn— ” “ Yes ? ” say the Jew , bend his head forward , with his eye almost start out of it .
“ Umph ! ” cry Sikes , stop short , a the girl , scarcely move her head , look suddenly round , and point for an instant to the Jew ’ s face .
“ Never mind which part it be .
You can ’ t do it without me , I know ; but it ’ s best to be on the safe side when one deal with you. ” “ As you like , my dear , a you like ” reply the Jew .
“ Is there no help want , but yours and Toby ’ s ? ” “ None , ” say Sikes .
“ Cept a centre-bit and a boy .
The first we ’ ve both get ; the second you must find us. ” “ A boy ! ” exclaim the Jew .
“ Oh !
then it ’ s a panel , eh ? ” “ Never mind wot it be ! ” reply Sikes .
“ I want a boy , and he musn ’ t be a big ’ un .
Lord ! ” say Mr. Sikes , reflectively , “ if I ’ d only get that young boy of Ned , the chimbley-sweeper ’ s !
He keep him small on purpose , and let him out by the job .
But the father get lag ; and then the Juvenile Delinquent Society come , and take the boy away from a trade where he be earn money , teach him to read and write , and in time make a ’ prentice of him .
And so they go on , ” say Mr. Sikes , his wrath rise with the recollection of his wrong , “ so they go on ; and , if they ’ d get money enough ( which it ’ s a Providence they haven ’ t , ) we shouldn ’ t have half a dozen boy leave in the whole trade , in a year or two. ” “ No more we should , ” acquiesce the Jew , who have be consider during this speech , and have only catch the last sentence .
“ Bill ! ” “ What now ? ” inquire Sikes .
The Jew nod his head towards Nancy , who be still gaze at the fire ; and intimate , by a sign , that he would have her tell to leave the room .
Sikes shrug his shoulder impatiently , a if he think the precaution unnecessary ; but comply , nevertheless , by request Miss Nancy to fetch him a jug of beer .
“ You don ’ t want any beer , ” say Nancy , fold her arm , and retain her seat very composedly .
“ I tell you I do ! ” replied Sikes .
“ Nonsense , ” rejoin the girl coolly , “ Go on , Fagin .
I know what he ’ s go to say , Bill ; he needn ’ t mind me. ” The Jew still hesitate .
Sikes look from one to the other in some surprise .
“ Why , you don ’ t mind the old girl , do you , Fagin ? ” he ask at length .
“ You ’ ve known her long enough to trust her , or the Devil ’ s in it .
She ain ’ t one to blab .
Are you Nancy ? ” “ _I_ should think not ! ” reply the young lady : draw her chair up to the table , and put her elbow upon it .
“ No , no , my dear , I know you ’ re not , ” say the Jew ; “ but— ” and again the old man pause .
“ But wot ? ” inquire Sikes .
“ I didn ’ t know whether she mightn ’ t p ’ r ’ aps be out of sort , you know , my dear , a she be the other night , ” reply the Jew .
At this confession , Miss Nancy burst into a loud laugh ; and , swallow a glass of brandy , shake her head with an air of defiance , and burst into sundry exclamation of “ Keep the game a-going ! ” “ Never say die ! ” and the like .
These seem to have the effect of re-assuring both gentleman ; for the Jew nod his head with a satisfied air , and resume his seat : a do Mr. Sikes likewise .
“ Now , Fagin , ” say Nancy with a laugh .
“ Tell Bill at once , about Oliver ! ” “ Ha !
you ’ re a clever one , my dear : the sharp girl I ever saw ! ” say the Jew , pat her on the neck .
“ It _was_ about Oliver I be go to speak , sure enough .
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” “ What about him ? ” demand Sikes .
“ He ’ s the boy for you , my dear , ” reply the Jew in a hoarse whisper ; lay his finger on the side of his nose , and grin frightfully .
“ He ! ” exclaim Sikes .
“ Have him , Bill ! ” say Nancy .
“ I would , if I be in your place .
He mayn ’ t be so much up , a any of the others ; but that ’ s not what you want , if he ’ s only to open a door for you .
Depend upon it he ’ s a safe one , Bill. ” “ I know he be , ” rejoin Fagin .
“ He ’ s be in good training these last few week , and it ’ s time he begin to work for his bread .
Besides , the others be all too big. ” “ Well , he be just the size I want , ” say Mr. Sikes , ruminate .
“ And will do everything you want , Bill , my dear , ” interpose the Jew ; “ he can ’ t help himself .
That be , if you frighten him enough. ” “ Frighten him ! ” echo Sikes .
“ It ’ ll be no sham frightening , mind you .
If there ’ s anything queer about him when we once get into the work ; in for a penny , in for a pound .
You win ’ t see him alive again , Fagin .
Think of that , before you send him .
Mark my word ! ” say the robber , poise a crowbar , which he have draw from under the bedstead .
“ I ’ ve thought of it all , ” say the Jew with energy .
“ I ’ ve—I ’ ve have my eye upon him , my dear , close—close .
Once let him feel that he be one of u ; once fill his mind with the idea that he have be a thief ; and he ’ s ours !
Ours for his life .
Oho !
It couldn ’ t have come about good ! ” The old man cross his arm upon his breast ; and , draw his head and shoulder into a heap , literally hug himself for joy .
“ Ours ! ” say Sikes .
“ Yours , you mean. ” “ Perhaps I do , my dear , ” say the Jew , with a shrill chuckle .
“ Mine , if you like , Bill. ” “ And wot , ” say Sikes , scowl fiercely on his agreeable friend , “ wot make you take so much pain about one chalk-faced kid , when you know there be fifty boy snooze about Common Garden every night , a you might pick and choose from ? ” “ Because they ’ re of no use to me , my dear , ” reply the Jew , with some confusion , “ not worth the taking .
Their look convict ’ em when they get into trouble , and I lose ’ em all .
With this boy , properly manage , my dear , I could do what I couldn ’ t with twenty of them .
Besides , ” say the Jew , recover his self-possession , “ he have u now if he could only give u leg-bail again ; and he must be in the same boat with u .
Never mind how he come there ; it ’ s quite enough for my power over him that he be in a robbery ; that ’ s all I want .
Now , how much well this be , than be oblige to put the poor leetle boy out of the way—which would be dangerous , and we should lose by it besides. ” “ When be it to be do ? ” ask Nancy , stop some turbulent exclamation on the part of Mr. Sikes , expressive of the disgust with which he receive Fagin ’ s affectation of humanity .
“ Ah , to be sure , ” say the Jew ; “ when be it to be do , Bill ? ” “ I plan with Toby , the night arter to-morrow , ” rejoin Sikes in a surly voice , “ if he heerd nothing from me to the contrairy. ” “ Good , ” say the Jew ; “ there ’ s no moon. ” “ No , ” rejoin Sikes .
“ It ’ s all arrange about bring off the swag , be it ? ” ask the Jew .
Sikes nod .
“ And about— ” “ Oh , ah , it ’ s all plan , ” rejoin Sikes , interrupt him .
“ Never mind particular .
You ’ d good bring the boy here to-morrow night .
I shall get off the stone an hour arter daybreak .
Then you hold your tongue , and keep the melting-pot ready , and that ’ s all you ’ ll have to do. ” After some discussion , in which all three take an active part , it be decide that Nancy should repair to the Jew ’ s next evening when the night have set in , and bring Oliver away with her ; Fagin craftily observe , that , if he evince any disinclination to the task , he would be more willing to accompany the girl who have so recently interfere in his behalf , than anybody else .
It be also solemnly arrange that poor Oliver should , for the purpose of the contemplated expedition , be unreservedly consign to the care and custody of Mr. William Sikes ; and far , that the say Sikes should deal with him a he think fit ; and should not be hold responsible by the Jew for any mischance or evil that might be necessary to visit him : it be understood that , to render the compact in this respect binding , any representation make by Mr. Sikes on his return should be require to be confirm and corroborate , in all important particular , by the testimony of flash Toby Crackit .
These preliminary adjust , Mr. Sikes proceed to drink brandy at a furious rate , and to flourish the crowbar in an alarming manner ; yell forth , at the same time , most unmusical snatch of song , mingle with wild execration .
At length , in a fit of professional enthusiasm , he insist upon produce his box of housebreaking tool : which he have no sooner stumble in with , and open for the purpose of explain the nature and property of the various implement it contain , and the peculiar beauty of their construction , than he fell over the box upon the floor , and go to sleep where he fell .
“ Good-night , Nancy , ” say the Jew , muffle himself up a before .
“ Good-night. ” Their eye meet , and the Jew scrutinise her , narrowly .
There be no flinch about the girl .
She be a true and earnest in the matter a Toby Crackit himself could be .
The Jew again bid her good-night , and , bestow a sly kick upon the prostrate form of Mr. Sikes while her back be turn , groped downstairs .
“ Always the way ! ” mutter the Jew to himself a he turn homeward .
“ The bad of these woman be , that a very little thing serf to call up some long-forgotten feeling ; and , the best of them be , that it never last .
Ha !
ha !
The man against the child , for a bag of gold ! ” Beguiling the time with these pleasant reflection , Mr. Fagin wend his way , through mud and mire , to his gloomy abode : where the Dodger be sit up , impatiently await his return .
“ Is Oliver a-bed ?
I want to speak to him , ” be his first remark a they descend the stair .
“ Hours ago , ” reply the Dodger , throw open a door .
“ Here he be ! ” The boy be lie , fast asleep , on a rude bed upon the floor ; so pale with anxiety , and sadness , and the closeness of his prison , that he look like death ; not death a it show in shroud and coffin , but in the guise it wear when life have just depart ; when a young and gentle spirit have , but an instant , flee to Heaven , and the gross air of the world have not have time to breathe upon the change dust it hallow .
“ Not now , ” say the Jew , turn softly away .
“ To-morrow .
To-morrow. ” CHAPTER XX .
WHEREIN OLIVER IS DELIVERED OVER TO MR. WILLIAM SIKES When Oliver awake in the morning , he be a good deal surprise to find that a new pair of shoe , with strong thick sol , have be place at his bedside ; and that his old shoe have be remove .
At first , he be pleased with the discovery : hoping that it might be the forerunner of his release ; but such thought be quickly dispel , on his sit down to breakfast along with the Jew , who tell him , in a tone and manner which increase his alarm , that he be to be take to the residence of Bill Sikes that night .
“ To—to—stop there , sir ? ” ask Oliver , anxiously .
“ No , no , my dear .
Not to stop there , ” reply the Jew .
“ We shouldn ’ t like to lose you .
Don ’ t be afraid , Oliver , you shall come back to u again .
Ha !
ha !
ha !
We win ’ t be so cruel a to send you away , my dear .
Oh no , no ! ” The old man , who be stoop over the fire toast a piece of bread , look round a he banter Oliver thus ; and chuckle a if to show that he know he would still be very glad to get away if he could .
“ I suppose , ” say the Jew , fix his eye on Oliver , “ you want to know what you ’ re go to Bill ’ s for—-eh , my dear ? ” Oliver colour , involuntarily , to find that the old thief have be read his thought ; but boldly say , Yes , he do want to know .
“ Why , do you think ? ” inquire Fagin , parry the question .
“ Indeed I don ’ t know , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ Bah ! ” say the Jew , turn away with a disappointed countenance from a close perusal of the boy ’ s face .
“ Wait till Bill tell you , then. ” The Jew seem much vex by Oliver ’ s not express any great curiosity on the subject ; but the truth be , that , although Oliver felt very anxious , he be too much confuse by the earnest cunning of Fagin ’ s look , and his own speculation , to make any further inquiry just then .
He have no other opportunity : for the Jew remain very surly and silent till night : when he prepare to go abroad .
“ You may burn a candle , ” say the Jew , put one upon the table .
“ And here ’ s a book for you to read , till they come to fetch you .
Good-night ! ” “ Good-night ! ” reply Oliver , softly .
The Jew walk to the door : look over his shoulder at the boy a he go .
Suddenly stopping , he call him by his name .
Oliver look up ; the Jew , point to the candle , motion him to light it .
He do so ; and , a he place the candlestick upon the table , saw that the Jew be gaze fixedly at him , with lower and contracted brow , from the dark end of the room .
“ Take heed , Oliver !
take heed ! ” say the old man , shake his right hand before him in a warning manner .
“ He ’ s a rough man , and think nothing of blood when his own be up .
Whatever fall out , say nothing ; and do what he bid you .
Mind ! ” Placing a strong emphasis on the last word , he suffer his feature gradually to resolve themselves into a ghastly grin , and , nod his head , leave the room .
Oliver lean his head upon his hand when the old man disappear , and ponder , with a tremble heart , on the word he have just hear .
The more he think of the Jew ’ s admonition , the more he be at a loss to divine it real purpose and meaning .
He could think of no bad object to be attain by send him to Sikes , which would not be equally well answer by his remain with Fagin ; and after meditate for a long time , conclude that he have be select to perform some ordinary menial office for the housebreaker , until another boy , well suit for his purpose could be engage .
He be too well accustomed to suffering , and have suffer too much where he be , to bewail the prospect of change very severely .
He remain lose in thought for some minute ; and then , with a heavy sigh , snuff the candle , and , take up the book which the Jew have leave with him , begin to read .
He turn over the leaf .
Carelessly at first ; but , light on a passage which attract his attention , he soon become intent upon the volume .
It be a history of the life and trial of great criminal ; and the page be soil and thumb with use .
Here , he read of dreadful crime that make the blood run cold ; of secret murder that have be commit by the lonely wayside ; of body hide from the eye of man in deep pit and well : which would not keep them down , deep a they be , but have yield them up at last , after many year , and so madden the murderer with the sight , that in their horror they have confess their guilt , and yell for the gibbet to end their agony .
Here , too , he read of men who , lie in their bed at dead of night , have be tempt ( so they say ) and lead on , by their own bad thought , to such dreadful bloodshed a it make the flesh creep , and the limbs quail , to think of .
The terrible description be so real and vivid , that the sallow page seem to turn red with gore ; and the word upon them , to be sound in his ear , a if they be whisper , in hollow murmur , by the spirit of the dead .
In a paroxysm of fear , the boy close the book , and thrust it from him .
Then , fall upon his knee , he pray Heaven to spare him from such deed ; and rather to will that he should die at once , than be reserve for crime , so fearful and appalling .
By degree , he grow more calm , and besought , in a low and broken voice , that he might be rescue from his present danger ; and that if any aid be to be raise up for a poor outcast boy who have never know the love of friend or kindred , it might come to him now , when , desolate and desert , he stand alone in the midst of wickedness and guilt .
He have conclude his prayer , but still remain with his head bury in his hand , when a rustling noise arouse him .
“ What ’ s that ! ” he cry , start up , and catch sight of a figure standing by the door .
“ Who ’ s there ? ” “ Me .
Only me , ” reply a tremulous voice .
Oliver raise the candle above his head : and look towards the door .
It be Nancy .
“ Put down the light , ” say the girl , turn away her head .
“ It hurt my eyes. ” Oliver saw that she be very pale , and gently inquire if she be ill .
The girl throw herself into a chair , with her back towards him : and wring her hand ; but make no reply .
“ God forgive me ! ” she cry after a while , “ I never think of this. ” “ Has anything happen ? ” ask Oliver .
“ Can I help you ?
I will if I can .
I will , indeed. ” She rock herself to and fro ; catch her throat ; and , utter a gurgling sound , gasp for breath .
“ Nancy ! ” cry Oliver , “ What be it ? ” The girl beat her hand upon her knee , and her foot upon the ground ; and , suddenly stop , draw her shawl close round her : and shiver with cold .
Oliver stir the fire .
Drawing her chair close to it , she sit there , for a little time , without speaking ; but at length she raise her head , and look round .
“ I don ’ t know what come over me sometimes , ” say she , affect to busy herself in arrange her dress ; “ it ’ s this damp dirty room , I think .
Now , Nolly , dear , be you ready ? ” “ Am I to go with you ? ” ask Oliver .
“ Yes .
I have come from Bill , ” reply the girl .
“ You be to go with me. ” “ What for ? ” ask Oliver , recoil .
“ What for ? ” echo the girl , raise her eye , and avert them again , the moment they encounter the boy ’ s face .
“ Oh !
For no harm. ” “ I don ’ t believe it , ” say Oliver : who have watch her closely .
“ Have it your own way , ” rejoin the girl , affect to laugh .
“ For no good , then. ” Oliver could see that he have some power over the girl ’ s well feeling , and , for an instant , thought of appeal to her compassion for his helpless state .
But , then , the thought dart across his mind that it be barely eleven o ’ clock ; and that many people be still in the street : of whom surely some might be find to give credence to his tale .
As the reflection occur to him , he step forward : and say , somewhat hastily , that he be ready .
Neither his brief consideration , nor it purport , be lose on his companion .
She eye him narrowly , while he speak ; and cast upon him a look of intelligence which sufficiently show that she guess what have be pass in his thought .
“ Hush ! ” say the girl , stoop over him , and point to the door a she look cautiously round .
“ You can ’ t help yourself .
I have try hard for you , but all to no purpose .
You be hedge round and round .
If ever you be to get loose from here , this be not the time. ” Struck by the energy of her manner , Oliver look up in her face with great surprise .
She seem to speak the truth ; her countenance be white and agitate ; and she tremble with very earnestness .
“ I have save you from be ill-used once , and I will again , and I do now , ” continue the girl aloud ; “ for those who would have fetch you , if I have not , would have be far more rough than me .
I have promise for your be quiet and silent ; if you be not , you will only do harm to yourself and me too , and perhaps be my death .
See here !
I have bear all this for you already , as true a God see me show it. ” She point , hastily , to some livid bruise on her neck and arm ; and continue , with great rapidity : “ Remember this !
And don ’ t let me suffer more for you , just now .
If I could help you , I would ; but I have not the power .
They don ’ t mean to harm you ; whatever they make you do , be no fault of yours .
Hush !
Every word from you be a blow for me .
Give me your hand .
Make haste !
Your hand ! ” She catch the hand which Oliver instinctively place in hers , and , blow out the light , draw him after her up the stair .
The door be open , quickly , by some one shroud in the darkness , and be a quickly close , when they have pass out .
A hackney-cabriolet be in wait ; with the same vehemence which she have exhibit in address Oliver , the girl pull him in with her , and draw the curtain close .
The driver want no direction , but lash his horse into full speed , without the delay of an instant .
The girl still hold Oliver fast by the hand , and continue to pour into his ear , the warning and assurance she have already impart .
All be so quick and hurry , that he have scarcely time to recollect where he be , or how he come there , when the carriage stop at the house to which the Jew ’ s step have be direct on the previous evening .
For one brief moment , Oliver cast a hurried glance along the empty street , and a cry for help hung upon his lip .
But the girl ’ s voice be in his ear , beseech him in such tone of agony to remember her , that he have not the heart to utter it .
While he hesitate , the opportunity be go ; he be already in the house , and the door be shut .
“ This way , ” say the girl , release her hold for the first time .
“ Bill ! ” “ Hallo ! ” reply Sikes : appearing at the head of the stair , with a candle .
“ Oh !
That ’ s the time of day .
Come on ! ” This be a very strong expression of approbation , an uncommonly hearty welcome , from a person of Mr. Sikes ’ temperament .
Nancy , appear much gratify thereby , salute him cordially .
“ Bull ’ s-eye ’ s go home with Tom , ” observe Sikes , a he light them up .
“ He ’ d have be in the way. ” “ That ’ s right , ” rejoin Nancy .
“ So you ’ ve get the kid , ” say Sikes when they have all reach the room : closing the door a he speak .
“ Yes , here he be , ” reply Nancy .
“ Did he come quiet ? ” inquire Sikes .
“ Like a lamb , ” rejoin Nancy .
“ I ’ m glad to hear it , ” say Sikes , look grimly at Oliver ; “ for the sake of his young carcase : as would otherways have suffer for it .
Come here , young ’ un ; and let me read you a lectur ’ , which be as well get over at once. ” Thus address his new pupil , Mr. Sikes pull off Oliver ’ s cap and throw it into a corner ; and then , take him by the shoulder , sit himself down by the table , and stand the boy in front of him .
“ Now , first : do you know wot this be ? ” inquired Sikes , take up a pocket-pistol which lay on the table .
Oliver reply in the affirmative .
“ Well , then , look here , ” continue Sikes .
“ This be powder ; that ’ ere ’ s a bullet ; and this be a little bit of a old hat for waddin ’ . ” Oliver murmur his comprehension of the different body refer to ; and Mr. Sikes proceed to load the pistol , with great nicety and deliberation .
“ Now it ’ s load , ” say Mr. Sikes , when he have finish .
“ Yes , I see it be , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ Well , ” say the robber , grasp Oliver ’ s wrist , and put the barrel so close to his temple that they touch ; at which moment the boy could not repress a start ; “ if you speak a word when you ’ re out o ’ door with me , except when I speak to you , that load will be in your head without notice .
So , if you _do_ make up your mind to speak without leave , say your prayer first. ” Having bestow a scowl upon the object of this warning , to increase it effect , Mr. Sikes continue .
“ As near a I know , there isn ’ t anybody a would be ask very partickler arter you , if you _was_ dispose of ; so I needn ’ t take this devil-and-all of trouble to explain matter to you , if it warn ’ t for your own good .
D ’ ye hear me ? ” “ The short and the long of what you mean , ” say Nancy : speaking very emphatically , and slightly frown at Oliver a if to bespeak his serious attention to her word : “ be , that if you ’ re cross by him in this job you have on hand , you ’ ll prevent his ever tell tale afterwards , by shoot him through the head , and will take your chance of swing for it , a you do for a great many other thing in the way of business , every month of your life. ” “ That ’ s it ! ” observe Mr. Sikes , approvingly ; “ woman can always put thing in few words.—Except when it ’ s blow up ; and then they lengthen it out .
And now that he ’ s thoroughly up to it , let ’ s have some supper , and get a snooze before starting. ” In pursuance of this request , Nancy quickly lay the cloth ; disappear for a few minute , she presently return with a pot of porter and a dish of sheep ’ s head : which give occasion to several pleasant witticism on the part of Mr. Sikes , found upon the singular coincidence of “ jemmy ” be a can name , common to them , and also to an ingenious implement much use in his profession .
Indeed , the worthy gentleman , stimulate perhaps by the immediate prospect of be on active service , be in great spirit and good humour ; in proof whereof , it may be here remark , that he humourously drink all the beer at a draught , and do not utter , on a rough calculation , more than four-score oath during the whole progress of the meal .
Supper be ended—it may be easily conceive that Oliver have no great appetite for it—Mr .
Sikes dispose of a couple of glass of spirit and water , and throw himself on the bed ; order Nancy , with many imprecation in case of failure , to call him at five precisely .
Oliver stretch himself in his clothes , by command of the same authority , on a mattress upon the floor ; and the girl , mend the fire , sit before it , in readiness to rouse them at the appointed time .
For a long time Oliver lay awake , think it not impossible that Nancy might seek that opportunity of whisper some further advice ; but the girl sit brooding over the fire , without move , save now and then to trim the light .
Weary with watching and anxiety , he at length fell asleep .
When he awake , the table be cover with tea-things , and Sikes be thrust various article into the pocket of his great-coat , which hang over the back of a chair .
Nancy be busily engage in prepare breakfast .
It be not yet daylight ; for the candle be still burn , and it be quite dark outside .
A sharp rain , too , be beat against the window-panes ; and the sky look black and cloudy .
“ Now , then ! ” growl Sikes , a Oliver start up ; “ half-past five !
Look sharp , or you ’ ll get no breakfast ; for it ’ s late a it is. ” Oliver be not long in make his toilet ; have take some breakfast , he reply to a surly inquiry from Sikes , by say that he be quite ready .
Nancy , scarcely look at the boy , throw him a handkerchief to tie round his throat ; Sikes give him a large rough cape to button over his shoulder .
Thus attire , he give his hand to the robber , who , merely pause to show him with a menacing gesture that he have that same pistol in a side-pocket of his great-coat , clasp it firmly in his , and , exchange a farewell with Nancy , lead him away .
Oliver turn , for an instant , when they reach the door , in the hope of meet a look from the girl .
But she have resume her old seat in front of the fire , and sit , perfectly motionless before it .
CHAPTER XXI .
THE EXPEDITION It be a cheerless morning when they get into the street ; blowing and rain hard ; and the cloud look dull and stormy .
The night have be very wet : large pool of water have collect in the road : and the kennel be overflow .
There be a faint glimmering of the come day in the sky ; but it rather aggravate than relieve the gloom of the scene : the sombre light only serve to pale that which the street lamp afford , without shed any warmer or brighter tint upon the wet house-tops , and dreary street .
There appear to be nobody stir in that quarter of the town ; the window of the house be all closely shut ; and the street through which they pass , be noiseless and empty .
By the time they have turn into the Bethnal Green Road , the day have fairly begin to break .
Many of the lamp be already extinguish ; a few country waggon be slowly toil on , towards London ; now and then , a stage-coach , cover with mud , rattle briskly by : the driver bestowing , a he pass , an admonitory lash upon the heavy waggoner who , by keep on the wrong side of the road , have endanger his arriving at the office , a quarter of a minute after his time .
The public-houses , with gas-lights burn inside , be already open .
By degree , other shop begin to be unclosed , and a few scattered people be meet with .
Then , come straggle group of labourer go to their work ; then , men and woman with fish-baskets on their head ; donkey-carts lade with vegetable ; chaise-carts fill with live-stock or whole carcass of meat ; milk-women with pail ; an unbroken concourse of people , trudge out with various supply to the eastern suburb of the town .
As they approach the City , the noise and traffic gradually increase ; when they thread the street between Shoreditch and Smithfield , it have swell into a roar of sound and bustle .
It be as light a it be likely to be , till night come on again , and the busy morning of half the London population have begin .
Turning down Sun Street and Crown Street , and cross Finsbury square , Mr. Sikes strike , by way of Chiswell Street , into Barbican : thence into Long Lane , and so into Smithfield ; from which latter place arise a tumult of discordant sound that fill Oliver Twist with amazement .
It be market-morning .
The ground be cover , nearly ankle-deep , with filth and mire ; a thick steam , perpetually rise from the reek body of the cattle , and mingle with the fog , which seem to rest upon the chimney-tops , hang heavily above .
All the pen in the centre of the large area , and a many temporary pen a could be crowd into the vacant space , be fill with sheep ; tie up to post by the gutter side be long line of beast and ox , three or four deep .
Countrymen , butcher , drover , hawker , boy , thief , idler , and vagabond of every low grade , be mingle together in a mass ; the whistling of drover , the bark dog , the bellowing and plunging of the ox , the bleating of sheep , the grunting and squeaking of pig , the cry of hawker , the shout , oath , and quarrel on all side ; the ringing of bell and roar of voice , that issue from every public-house ; the crowding , push , drive , beating , whoop and yelling ; the hideous and discordant dim that resound from every corner of the market ; and the unwashed , unshaven , squalid , and dirty figure constantly run to and fro , and burst in and out of the throng ; render it a stunning and bewildering scene , which quite confound the sens .
Mr. Sikes , drag Oliver after him , elbow his way through the thickest of the crowd , and bestow very little attention on the numerous sight and sound , which so astonish the boy .
He nod , twice or thrice , to a passing friend ; and , resist a many invitation to take a morning dram , press steadily onward , until they be clear of the turmoil , and have make their way through Hosier Lane into Holborn .
“ Now , young ’ un ! ” say Sikes , look up at the clock of St. Andrew ’ s Church , “ hard upon seven !
you must step out .
Come , don ’ t lag behind already , Lazy-legs ! ” Mr. Sikes accompany this speech with a jerk at his little companion ’ s wrist ; Oliver , quicken his pace into a kind of trot between a fast walk and a run , keep up with the rapid stride of the house-breaker as well a he could .
They hold their course at this rate , until they have pass Hyde Park corner , and be on their way to Kensington : when Sikes relax his pace , until an empty cart which be at some little distance behind , come up .
Seeing “ Hounslow ” write on it , he ask the driver with as much civility a he could assume , if he would give them a lift as far a Isleworth .
“ Jump up , ” say the man .
“ Is that your boy ? ” “ Yes ; he ’ s my boy , ” reply Sikes , look hard at Oliver , and put his hand abstractedly into the pocket where the pistol be .
“ Your father walk rather too quick for you , don ’ t he , my man ? ” inquire the driver : seeing that Oliver be out of breath .
“ Not a bit of it , ” reply Sikes , interposing .
“ He ’ s use to it .
Here , take hold of my hand , Ned .
In with you ! ” Thus address Oliver , he help him into the cart ; and the driver , point to a heap of sack , tell him to lie down there , and rest himself .
As they pass the different mile-stones , Oliver wonder , more and more , where his companion mean to take him .
Kensington , Hammersmith , Chiswick , Kew Bridge , Brentford , be all pass ; and yet they go on as steadily a if they have only just begin their journey .
At length , they come to a public-house call the Coach and Horses ; a little way beyond which , another road appear to run off .
And here , the cart stop .
Sikes dismount with great precipitation , hold Oliver by the hand all the while ; and lift him down directly , bestow a furious look upon him , and rap the side-pocket with his fist , in a significant manner .
“ Good-bye , boy , ” say the man .
“ He ’ s sulky , ” reply Sikes , give him a shake ; “ he ’ s sulky .
A young dog !
Don ’ t mind him. ” “ Not I ! ” rejoin the other , get into his cart .
“ It ’ s a fine day , after all. ” And he drive away .
Sikes wait until he have fairly go ; and then , tell Oliver he might look about him if he want , once again lead him onward on his journey .
They turn round to the left , a short way past the public-house ; and then , take a right-hand road , walk on for a long time : passing many large garden and gentleman ’ s house on both side of the way , and stop for nothing but a little beer , until they reach a town .
Here against the wall of a house , Oliver saw write up in pretty large letter , “ Hampton. ” They linger about , in the field , for some hour .
At length they come back into the town ; and , turn into an old public-house with a defaced sign-board , order some dinner by the kitchen fire .
The kitchen be an old , low-roofed room ; with a great beam across the middle of the ceiling , and bench , with high back to them , by the fire ; on which be seat several rough men in smock-frocks , drinking and smoking .
They take no notice of Oliver ; and very little of Sikes ; and , a Sikes take very little notice of them , he and his young comrade sit in a corner by themselves , without be much trouble by their company .
They have some cold meat for dinner , and sit so long after it , while Mr. Sikes indulge himself with three or four pipe , that Oliver begin to feel quite certain they be not go any further .
Being much tire with the walk , and get up so early , he doze a little at first ; then , quite overpower by fatigue and the fume of the tobacco , fell asleep .
It be quite dark when he be awaken by a push from Sikes .
Rousing himself sufficiently to sit up and look about him , he find that worthy in close fellowship and communication with a labour man , over a pint of ale .
“ So , you ’ re go on to Lower Halliford , be you ? ” inquired Sikes .
“ Yes , I be , ” reply the man , who seem a little the worse—or well , a the case might be—for drinking ; “ and not slow about it neither .
My horse hasn ’ t get a load behind him go back , a he have come up in the mornin ’ ; and he win ’ t be long a-doing of it .
Here ’ s luck to him .
Ecod !
he ’ s a good ’ un ! ” “ Could you give my boy and me a lift as far a there ? ” demand Sikes , push the ale towards his new friend .
“ If you ’ re go directly , I can , ” reply the man , look out of the pot .
“ Are you go to Halliford ? ” “ Going on to Shepperton , ” reply Sikes .
“ I ’ m your man , as far a I go , ” reply the other .
“ Is all pay , Becky ? ” “ Yes , the other gentleman ’ s pay , ” reply the girl .
“ I say ! ” say the man , with tipsy gravity ; “ that win ’ t do , you know. ” “ Why not ? ” rejoin Sikes .
“ You ’ re a-going to accommodate u , and wot ’ s to prevent my stand treat for a pint or so , in return ? ” The stranger reflect upon this argument , with a very profound face ; have do so , he seize Sikes by the hand : and declare he be a real good fellow .
To which Mr. Sikes reply , he be joke ; a , if he have be sober , there would have be strong reason to suppose he be .
After the exchange of a few more compliment , they bid the company good-night , and go out ; the girl gather up the pot and glass a they do so , and lounge out to the door , with her hand full , to see the party start .
The horse , whose health have be drink in his absence , be stand outside : ready harness to the cart .
Oliver and Sikes get in without any further ceremony ; and the man to whom he belong , have linger for a minute or two “ to bear him up , ” and to defy the hostler and the world to produce his equal , mount also .
Then , the hostler be tell to give the horse his head ; and , his head be give him , he make a very unpleasant use of it : toss it into the air with great disdain , and run into the parlour windows over the way ; after perform those feat , and support himself for a short time on his hind-legs , he start off at great speed , and rattle out of the town right gallantly .
The night be very dark .
A damp mist rise from the river , and the marshy ground about ; and spread itself over the dreary field .
It be pierce cold , too ; all be gloomy and black .
Not a word be speak ; for the driver have grow sleepy ; and Sikes be in no mood to lead him into conversation .
Oliver sit huddle together , in a corner of the cart ; bewilder with alarm and apprehension ; and figure strange object in the gaunt tree , whose branch wave grimly to and fro , a if in some fantastic joy at the desolation of the scene .
As they pass Sunbury Church , the clock strike seven .
There be a light in the ferry-house window opposite : which stream across the road , and throw into more sombre shadow a dark yew-tree with graf beneath it .
There be a dull sound of fall water not far off ; and the leaf of the old tree stir gently in the night wind .
It seem like quiet music for the repose of the dead .
Sunbury be pass through , and they come again into the lonely road .
Two or three mile more , and the cart stop .
Sikes alight , take Oliver by the hand , and they once again walk on .
They turn into no house at Shepperton , a the weary boy have expect ; but still keep walk on , in mud and darkness , through gloomy lane and over cold open waste , until they come within sight of the light of a town at no great distance .
On look intently forward , Oliver saw that the water be just below them , and that they be come to the foot of a bridge .
Sikes keep straight on , until they be close upon the bridge ; then turn suddenly down a bank upon the left .
“ The water ! ” think Oliver , turn sick with fear .
“ He have bring me to this lonely place to murder me ! ” He be about to throw himself on the ground , and make one struggle for his young life , when he saw that they stand before a solitary house : all ruinous and decayed .
There be a window on each side of the dilapidated entrance ; and one story above ; but no light be visible .
The house be dark , dismantle : and the all appearance , uninhabited .
Sikes , with Oliver ’ s hand still in his , softly approach the low porch , and raise the latch .
The door yield to the pressure , and they pass in together .
CHAPTER XXII .
THE BURGLARY “ Hallo ! ” cry a loud , hoarse voice , as soon a they set foot in the passage .
“ Don ’ t make such a row , ” say Sikes , bolt the door .
“ Show a glim , Toby. ” “ Aha !
my pal ! ” cry the same voice .
“ A glim , Barney , a glim !
Show the gentleman in , Barney ; wake up first , if convenient. ” The speaker appear to throw a boot-jack , or some such article , at the person he address , to rouse him from his slumber : for the noise of a wooden body , fall violently , be hear ; and then an indistinct muttering , a of a man between sleep and awake .
“ Do you hear ? ” cry the same voice .
“ There ’ s Bill Sikes in the passage with nobody to do the civil to him ; and you sleep there , a if you take laudanum with your meal , and nothing stronger .
Are you any fresher now , or do you want the iron candlestick to wake you thoroughly ? ” A pair of slipshod foot shuffle , hastily , across the bare floor of the room , a this interrogatory be put ; and there issue , from a door on the right hand ; first , a feeble candle : and next , the form of the same individual who have be heretofore describe a labour under the infirmity of speak through his nose , and officiate a waiter at the public-house on Saffron Hill .
“ Bister Sikes ! ” exclaim Barney , with real or counterfeit joy ; “ cub id , sir ; cub id. ” “ Here !
you get on first , ” say Sikes , put Oliver in front of him .
“ Quicker !
or I shall tread upon your heels. ” Muttering a curse upon his tardiness , Sikes push Oliver before him ; and they enter a low dark room with a smoky fire , two or three broken chair , a table , and a very old couch : on which , with his leg much high than his head , a man be repose at full length , smoke a long clay pipe .
He be dress in a smartly-cut snuff-coloured coat , with large brass button ; an orange neckerchief ; a coarse , star , shawl-pattern waistcoat ; and drab breech .
Mr. Crackit ( for he it be ) have no very great quantity of hair , either upon his head or face ; but what he have , be of a reddish dye , and torture into long corkscrew curl , through which he occasionally thrust some very dirty finger , ornament with large common ring .
He be a trifle above the middle size , and apparently rather weak in the leg ; but this circumstance by no mean detract from his own admiration of his top-boots , which he contemplate , in their elevated situation , with lively satisfaction .
“ Bill , my boy ! ” say this figure , turn his head towards the door , “ I ’ m glad to see you .
I be almost afraid you ’ d give it up : in which case I should have make a personal wentur .
Hallo ! ” Uttering this exclamation in a tone of great surprise , a his eye rest on Oliver , Mr. Toby Crackit bring himself into a sitting posture , and demand who that be .
“ The boy .
Only the boy ! ” reply Sikes , draw a chair towards the fire .
“ Wud of Bister Fagid ’ s lad , ” exclaim Barney , with a grin .
“ Fagin ’ s , eh ! ” exclaim Toby , look at Oliver .
“ Wot an inwalable boy that ’ ll make , for the old lady ’ pocket in chapel !
His mug be a fortin ’ to him. ” “ There—there ’ s enough of that , ” interposed Sikes , impatiently ; and stoop over his recumbant friend , he whisper a few word in his ear : at which Mr. Crackit laugh immensely , and honour Oliver with a long stare of astonishment .
“ Now , ” say Sikes , a he resume his seat , “ if you ’ ll give u something to eat and drink while we ’ re waiting , you ’ ll put some heart in u ; or in me , at all event .
Sit down by the fire , younker , and rest yourself ; for you ’ ll have to go out with u again to-night , though not very far off. ” Oliver look at Sikes , in mute and timid wonder ; and draw a stool to the fire , sit with his ache head upon his hand , scarecely know where he be , or what be pass around him .
“ Here , ” say Toby , a the young Jew place some fragment of food , and a bottle upon the table , “ Success to the crack ! ” He rise to honour the toast ; and , carefully deposit his empty pipe in a corner , advance to the table , fill a glass with spirit , and drink off it content .
Mr. Sikes do the same .
“ A drain for the boy , ” say Toby , half-filling a wine-glass .
“ Down with it , innocence. ” “ Indeed , ” say Oliver , look piteously up into the man ’ s face ; “ indeed , I— ” “ Down with it ! ” echoed Toby .
“ Do you think I don ’ t know what ’ s good for you ?
Tell him to drink it , Bill. ” “ He have well ! ” say Sikes clap his hand upon his pocket .
“ Burn my body , if he isn ’ t more trouble than a whole family of Dodgers .
Drink it , you perwerse imp ; drink it ! ” Frightened by the menacing gesture of the two men , Oliver hastily swallow the content of the glass , and immediately fell into a violent fit of coughing : which delight Toby Crackit and Barney , and even draw a smile from the surly Mr. Sikes .
This do , and Sikes have satisfy his appetite ( Oliver could eat nothing but a small crust of bread which they make him swallow ) , the two men lay themselves down on chair for a short nap .
Oliver retain his stool by the fire ; Barney wrap in a blanket , stretch himself on the floor : close outside the fender .
They sleep , or appear to sleep , for some time ; nobody stir but Barney , who rise once or twice to throw coal on the fire .
Oliver fell into a heavy doze : imagining himself stray along the gloomy lane , or wander about the dark churchyard , or retrace some one or other of the scene of the past day : when he be rouse by Toby Crackit jump up and declare it be half-past one .
In an instant , the other two be on their leg , and all be actively engage in busy preparation .
Sikes and his companion envelop their neck and chin in large dark shawl , and draw on their great-coats ; Barney , open a cupboard , bring forth several article , which he hastily cram into the pocket .
“ Barkers for me , Barney , ” say Toby Crackit .
“ Here they be , ” reply Barney , produce a pair of pistol .
“ You load them yourself. ” “ All right ! ” replied Toby , stow them away .
“ The persuader ? ” “ I ’ ve get ’ em , ” reply Sikes .
“ Crape , key , centre-bits , darkies—nothing forget ? ” inquire Toby : fasten a small crowbar to a loop inside the skirt of his coat .
“ All right , ” rejoin his companion .
“ Bring them bit of timber , Barney .
That ’ s the time of day. ” With these word , he take a thick stick from Barney ’ s hand , who , have deliver another to Toby , busy himself in fasten on Oliver ’ s cape .
“ Now then ! ” say Sikes , hold out his hand .
Oliver : who be completely stupified by the unwonted exercise , and the air , and the drink which have be force upon him : put his hand mechanically into that which Sikes extend for the purpose .
“ Take his other hand , Toby , ” say Sikes .
“ Look out , Barney. ” The man go to the door , and return to announce that all be quiet .
The two robber issue forth with Oliver between them .
Barney , have make all fast , roll himself up a before , and be soon asleep again .
It be now intensely dark .
The fog be much heavy than it have be in the early part of the night ; and the atmosphere be so damp , that , although no rain fell , Oliver ’ s hair and eyebrow , within a few minute after leave the house , have become stiff with the half-frozen moisture that be float about .
They cross the bridge , and keep on towards the light which he have see before .
They be at no great distance off ; and , a they walk pretty briskly , they soon arrive at Chertsey .
“ Slap through the town , ” whisper Sikes ; “ there ’ ll be nobody in the way , to-night , to see us. ” Toby acquiesce ; and they hurry through the main street of the little town , which at that late hour be wholly desert .
A dim light shone at interval from some bed-room window ; and the hoarse barking of dog occasionally break the silence of the night .
But there be nobody abroad .
They have clear the town , a the church-bell struck two .
Quickening their pace , they turn up a road upon the left hand .
After walk about a quarter of a mile , they stop before a detached house surround by a wall : to the top of which , Toby Crackit , scarcely pause to take breath , climb in a twinkling .
“ The boy next , ” say Toby .
“ Hoist him up ; I ’ ll catch hold of him. ” Before Oliver have time to look round , Sikes have catch him under the arm ; and in three or four second he and Toby be lie on the grass on the other side .
Sikes follow directly .
And they steal cautiously towards the house .
And now , for the first time , Oliver , well-nigh mad with grief and terror , saw that housebreak and robbery , if not murder , be the object of the expedition .
He clasp his hand together , and involuntarily utter a subdued exclamation of horror .
A mist come before his eye ; the cold sweat stand upon his ashy face ; his limb fail him ; and he sink upon his knee .
“ Get up ! ” murmur Sikes , tremble with rage , and draw the pistol from his pocket ; “ Get up , or I ’ ll strew your brain upon the grass. ” “ Oh !
for God ’ s sake let me go ! ” cried Oliver ; “ let me run away and die in the field .
I will never come near London ; never , never !
Oh !
pray have mercy on me , and do not make me steal .
For the love of all the bright Angels that rest in Heaven , have mercy upon me ! ” The man to whom this appeal be make , swear a dreadful oath , and have cock the pistol , when Toby , strike it from his grasp , place his hand upon the boy ’ s mouth , and drag him to the house .
“ Hush ! ” cry the man ; “ it win ’ t answer here .
Say another word , and I ’ ll do your business myself with a crack on the head .
That make no noise , and be quite as certain , and more genteel .
Here , Bill , wrench the shutter open .
He ’ s game enough now , I ’ ll engage .
I ’ ve see old hand of his age take the same way , for a minute or two , on a cold night. ” Sikes , invoke terrific imprecation upon Fagin ’ s head for send Oliver on such an errand , ply the crowbar vigorously , but with little noise .
After some delay , and some assistance from Toby , the shutter to which he have refer , swung open on it hinge .
It be a little lattice window , about five foot and a half above the ground , at the back of the house : which belong to a scullery , or small brewing-place , at the end of the passage .
The aperture be so small , that the inmate have probably not think it worth while to defend it more securely ; but it be large enough to admit a boy of Oliver ’ s size , nevertheless .
A very brief exercise of Mr. Sike ’ s art , suffice to overcome the fastening of the lattice ; and it soon stand wide open also .
“ Now listen , you young limb , ” whisper Sikes , draw a dark lantern from his pocket , and throw the glare full on Oliver ’ s face ; “ I ’ m a go to put you through there .
Take this light ; go softly up the step straight afore you , and along the little hall , to the street door ; unfasten it , and let u in. ” “ There ’ s a bolt at the top , you win ’ t be able to reach , ” interpose Toby .
“ Stand upon one of the hall chair .
There be three there , Bill , with a jolly large blue unicorn and gold pitchfork on ’ em : which be the old lady ’ s arms. ” “ Keep quiet , can ’ t you ? ” reply Sikes , with a threatening look .
“ The room-door be open , be it ? ” “ Wide , ” reply Toby , after peep in to satisfy himself .
“ The game of that be , that they always leave it open with a catch , so that the dog , who ’ s get a bed in here , may walk up and down the passage when he feel wakeful .
Ha !
ha !
Barney ’ ticed him away to-night .
So neat ! ” Although Mr. Crackit speak in a scarcely audible whisper , and laugh without noise , Sikes imperiously command him to be silent , and to get to work .
Toby comply , by first produce his lantern , and place it on the ground ; then by plant himself firmly with his head against the wall beneath the window , and his hand upon his knee , so a to make a step of his back .
This be no sooner do , than Sikes , mount upon him , put Oliver gently through the window with his foot first ; and , without leave hold of his collar , plant him safely on the floor inside .
“ Take this lantern , ” say Sikes , look into the room .
“ You see the stair afore you ? ” Oliver , more dead than alive , gasp out , “ Yes. ” Sikes , point to the street-door with the pistol-barrel , briefly advise him to take notice that he be within shot all the way ; and that if he falter , he would fall dead that instant .
“ It ’ s do in a minute , ” say Sikes , in the same low whisper .
“ Directly I leave go of you , do your work .
Hark ! ” “ What ’ s that ? ” whisper the other man .
They listen intently .
“ Nothing , ” say Sikes , release his hold of Oliver .
“ Now ! ” In the short time he have have to collect his sens , the boy have firmly resolve that , whether he die in the attempt or not , he would make one effort to dart upstairs from the hall , and alarm the family .
Filled with this idea , he advance at once , but stealthily .
“ Come back ! ” suddenly cry Sikes aloud .
“ Back !
back ! ” Scared by the sudden breaking of the dead stillness of the place , and by a loud cry which follow it , Oliver let his lantern fall , and know not whether to advance or fly .
The cry be repeated—a light appeared—a vision of two terrified half-dressed men at the top of the stair swam before his eyes—a flash—a loud noise—a smoke—a crash somewhere , but where he know not , —and he stagger back .
Sikes have disappear for an instant ; but he be up again , and have him by the collar before the smoke have clear away .
He fire his own pistol after the men , who be already retreat ; and drag the boy up .
“ Clasp your arm tighter , ” say Sikes , a he draw him through the window .
“ Give me a shawl here .
They ’ ve hit him .
Quick !
How the boy bleed ! ” Then come the loud ringing of a bell , mingle with the noise of fire-arms , and the shout of men , and the sensation of be carry over uneven ground at a rapid pace .
And then , the noise grow confuse in the distance ; and a cold deadly feel crept over the boy ’ s heart ; and he saw or hear no more .
CHAPTER XXIII .
WHICH CONTAINS THE SUBSTANCE OF A PLEASANT CONVERSATION BETWEEN MR. BUMBLE AND A LADY ; AND SHOWS THAT EVEN A BEADLE MAY BE SUSCEPTIBLE ON SOME POINTS The night be bitter cold .
The snow lay on the ground , freeze into a hard thick crust , so that only the heap that have drift into byway and corner be affect by the sharp wind that howl abroad : which , a if expend increased fury on such prey a it find , catch it savagely up in cloud , and , whirl it into a thousand misty eddy , scatter it in air .
Bleak , dark , and pierce cold , it be a night for the well-housed and feed to draw round the bright fire and thank God they be at home ; and for the homeless , starve wretch to lay him down and die .
Many hunger-worn outcast close their eye in our bare street , at such time , who , let their crime have be what they may , can hardly open them in a more bitter world .
Such be the aspect of out-of-doors affair , when Mrs. Corney , the matron of the workhouse to which our reader have be already introduce a the birthplace of Oliver Twist , sit herself down before a cheerful fire in her own little room , and glance , with no small degree of complacency , at a small round table : on which stand a tray of correspond size , furnish with all necessary material for the most grateful meal that matron enjoy .
In fact , Mrs. Corney be about to solace herself with a cup of tea .
As she glance from the table to the fireplace , where the small of all possible kettle be sing a small song in a small voice , her inward satisfaction evidently increase , —so much so , indeed , that Mrs. Corney smile .
“ Well ! ” say the matron , lean her elbow on the table , and look reflectively at the fire ; “ I ’ m sure we have all on u a great deal to be grateful for !
A great deal , if we do but know it .
Ah ! ” Mrs. Corney shake her head mournfully , a if deplore the mental blindness of those pauper who do not know it ; and thrust a silver spoon ( private property ) into the inmost recess of a two-ounce tin tea-caddy , proceed to make the tea .
How slight a thing will disturb the equanimity of our frail mind !
The black teapot , be very small and easily fill , run over while Mrs. Corney be moralise ; and the water slightly scald Mrs. Corney ’ s hand .
“ Drat the pot ! ” say the worthy matron , set it down very hastily on the hob ; “ a little stupid thing , that only hold a couple of cup !
What use be it of , to anybody !
Except , ” say Mrs. Corney , pausing , “ except to a poor desolate creature like me .
Oh dear ! ” With these word , the matron drop into her chair , and , once more rest her elbow on the table , thought of her solitary fate .
The small teapot , and the single cup , have awaken in her mind sad recollection of Mr. Corney ( who have not be dead more than five-and-twenty year ) ; and she be overpower .
“ I shall never get another ! ” say Mrs. Corney , pettishly ; “ I shall never get another—like him. ” Whether this remark bore reference to the husband , or the teapot , be uncertain .
It might have be the latter ; for Mrs. Corney look at it a she speak ; and take it up afterwards .
She have just taste her first cup , when she be disturb by a soft tap at the room-door .
“ Oh , come in with you ! ” say Mrs. Corney , sharply .
“ Some of the old woman die , I suppose .
They always die when I ’ m at meal .
Don ’ t stand there , let the cold air in , don ’ t .
What ’ s amiss now , eh ? ” “ Nothing , ma ’ be , nothing , ” reply a man ’ s voice .
“ Dear me ! ” exclaim the matron , in a much sweeter tone , “ be that Mr. Bumble ? ” “ At your service , ma ’ be , ” say Mr. Bumble , who have be stop outside to rub his shoe clean , and to shake the snow off his coat ; and who now make his appearance , bear the cocked hat in one hand and a bundle in the other .
“ Shall I shut the door , ma ’ be ? ” The lady modestly hesitate to reply , l there should be any impropriety in hold an interview with Mr. Bumble , with closed door .
Mr. Bumble take advantage of the hesitation , and be very cold himself , shut it without permission .
“ Hard weather , Mr. Bumble , ” say the matron .
“ Hard , indeed , ma ’ be , ” reply the beadle .
“ Anti-porochial weather this , ma ’ be .
We have give away , Mrs. Corney , we have give away a matter of twenty quartern loaf and a cheese and a half , this very blessed afternoon ; and yet them pauper be not contented. ” “ Of course not .
When would they be , Mr. Bumble ? ” say the matron , sip her tea .
“ When , indeed , ma ’ be ! ” rejoin Mr. Bumble .
“ Why here ’ s one man that , in consideration of his wife and large family , have a quartern loaf and a good pound of cheese , full weight .
Is he grateful , ma ’ be ?
Is he grateful ?
Not a copper farthing ’ s worth of it !
What do he do , ma ’ be , but ask for a few coal ; if it ’ s only a pocket handkerchief full , he say !
Coals !
What would he do with coal ?
Toast his cheese with ’ em and then come back for more .
That ’ s the way with these people , ma ’ be ; give ’ em a apron full of coal to-day , and they ’ ll come back for another , the day after to-morrow , as brazen a alabaster. ” The matron express her entire concurrence in this intelligible simile ; and the beadle go on .
“ I never , ” say Mr. Bumble , “ see anything like the pitch it ’ s get to .
The day afore yesterday , a man—you have be a married woman , ma ’ be , and I may mention it to you—a man , with hardly a rag upon his back ( here Mrs. Corney look at the floor ) , go to our overseer ’ s door when he have get company come to dinner ; and say , he must be relieve , Mrs. Corney .
As he wouldn ’ t go away , and shock the company very much , our overseer send him out a pound of potato and half a pint of oatmeal .
‘ My heart ! ’ say the ungrateful villain , ‘ what ’ s the use of _this_ to me ?
You might as well give me a pair of iron spectacle ! ’ ‘ Very good , ’ say our overseer , take ’ em away again , ‘ you win ’ t get anything else here. ’ ‘ Then I ’ ll die in the street ! ’ say the vagrant .
‘ Oh no , you win ’ t , ’ say our overseer. ” “ Ha !
ha !
That be very good !
So like Mr. Grannett , wasn ’ t it ? ” interpose the matron .
“ Well , Mr. Bumble ? ” “ Well , ma ’ be , ” rejoin the beadle , “ he go away ; and he _did_ die in the street .
There ’ s a obstinate pauper for you ! ” “ It beat anything I could have believe , ” observe the matron emphatically .
“ But don ’ t you think out-of-door relief a very bad thing , any way , Mr. Bumble ?
You ’ re a gentleman of experience , and ought to know .
Come. ” “ Mrs .
Corney , ” say the beadle , smile a men smile who be conscious of superior information , “ out-of-door relief , properly manage : properly manage , ma ’ be : be the porochial safeguard .
The great principle of out-of-door relief be , to give the pauper exactly what they don ’ t want ; and then they get tire of coming. ” “ Dear me ! ” exclaim Mrs. Corney .
“ Well , that be a good one , too ! ” “ Yes .
Betwixt you and me , ma ’ be , ” return Mr. Bumble , “ that ’ s the great principle ; and that ’ s the reason why , if you look at any case that get into them owdacious newspaper , you ’ ll always observe that sick family have be relieve with slice of cheese .
That ’ s the rule now , Mrs. Corney , all over the country .
But , however , ” say the beadle , stop to unpack his bundle , “ these be official secret , ma ’ be ; not to be speak of ; except , a I may say , among the porochial officer , such a ourselves .
This be the port wine , ma ’ be , that the board order for the infirmary ; real , fresh , genuine port wine ; only out of the cask this forenoon ; clear a a bell , and no sediment ! ” Having hold the first bottle up to the light , and shake it well to test it excellence , Mr. Bumble place them both on top of a chest of drawer ; fold the handkerchief in which they have be wrap ; put it carefully in his pocket ; and take up his hat , a if to go .
“ You ’ ll have a very cold walk , Mr. Bumble , ” say the matron .
“ It blow , ma ’ be , ” reply Mr. Bumble , turn up his coat-collar , “ enough to cut one ’ s ear off. ” The matron look , from the little kettle , to the beadle , who be move towards the door ; and a the beadle cough , preparatory to bid her good-night , bashfully inquire whether—whether he wouldn ’ t take a cup of tea ?
Mr. Bumble instantaneously turn back his collar again ; lay his hat and stick upon a chair ; and draw another chair up to the table .
As he slowly seat himself , he look at the lady .
She fix her eye upon the little teapot .
Mr. Bumble cough again , and slightly smile .
Mrs. Corney rise to get another cup and saucer from the closet .
As she sit down , her eyes once again encounter those of the gallant beadle ; she colour , and apply herself to the task of make his tea .
Again Mr. Bumble coughed—louder this time than he have cough yet .
“ Sweet ?
Mr. Bumble ? ” inquire the matron , take up the sugar-basin .
“ Very sweet , indeed , ma ’ be , ” reply Mr. Bumble .
He fix his eye on Mrs. Corney a he say this ; and if ever a beadle look tender , Mr. Bumble be that beadle at that moment .
The tea be make , and hand in silence .
Mr. Bumble , have spread a handkerchief over his knee to prevent the crumb from sully the splendour of his short , begin to eat and drink ; vary these amusement , occasionally , by fetch a deep sigh ; which , however , have no injurious effect upon his appetite , but , on the contrary , rather seem to facilitate his operation in the tea and toast department .
“ You have a cat , ma ’ be , I see , ” say Mr. Bumble , glance at one who , in the centre of her family , be bask before the fire ; “ and kitten too , I declare ! ” “ I be so fond of them , Mr. Bumble , you can ’ t think , ” reply the matron .
“ They ’ re _so_ happy , _so_ frolicsome , and _so_ cheerful , that they be quite companion for me. ” “ Very nice animal , ma ’ be , ” reply Mr. Bumble , approvingly ; “ so very domestic. ” “ Oh , yes ! ” rejoin the matron with enthusiasm ; “ so fond of their home too , that it ’ s quite a pleasure , I ’ m sure. ” “ Mrs .
Corney , ma ’ be , ” say Mr. Bumble , slowly , and mark the time with his teaspoon , “ I mean to say this , ma ’ be ; that any cat , or kitten , that could live with you , ma ’ be , and _not_ be fond of it home , must be a as , ma ’ am. ” “ Oh , Mr. Bumble ! ” remonstrate Mrs. Corney .
“ It ’ s of no use disguise fact , ma ’ be , ” say Mr. Bumble , slowly flourish the teaspoon with a kind of amorous dignity which make him doubly impressive ; “ I would drown it myself , with pleasure. ” “ Then you ’ re a cruel man , ” say the matron vivaciously , a she hold out her hand for the beadle ’ s cup ; “ and a very hard-hearted man besides. ” “ Hard-hearted , ma ’ be ? ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ Hard ? ” Mr. Bumble resign his cup without another word ; squeeze Mrs. Corney ’ s little finger a she take it ; and inflict two open-handed slap upon his laced waistcoat , give a mighty sigh , and hitch his chair a very little morsel far from the fire .
It be a round table ; and a Mrs. Corney and Mr. Bumble have be sit opposite each other , with no great space between them , and front the fire , it will be see that Mr. Bumble , in recede from the fire , and still keep at the table , increase the distance between himself and Mrs. Corney ; which proceeding , some prudent reader will doubtless be dispose to admire , and to consider an act of great heroism on Mr. Bumble ’ s part : he be in some sort tempt by time , place , and opportunity , to give utterance to certain soft nothing , which however well they may become the lip of the light and thoughtless , do seem immeasurably beneath the dignity of judge of the land , member of parliament , minister of state , lord mayor , and other great public functionary , but more particularly beneath the stateliness and gravity of a beadle : who ( a be well know ) should be the stern and most inflexible among them all .
Whatever be Mr. Bumble ’ s intention , however ( and no doubt they be of the best ) : it unfortunately happen , a have be twice before remarked , that the table be a round one ; consequently Mr. Bumble , move his chair by little and little , soon begin to diminish the distance between himself and the matron ; and , continue to travel round the outer edge of the circle , bring his chair , in time , close to that in which the matron be seat .
Indeed , the two chair touch ; and when they do so , Mr. Bumble stop .
Now , if the matron have move her chair to the right , she would have be scorch by the fire ; and if to the left , she must have fall into Mr. Bumble ’ s arm ; so ( be a discreet matron , and no doubt foresee these consequence at a glance ) she remain where she be , and hand Mr. Bumble another cup of tea .
“ Hard-hearted , Mrs. Corney ? ” say Mr. Bumble , stir his tea , and look up into the matron ’ s face ; “ be _you_ hard-hearted , Mrs. Corney ? ” “ Dear me ! ” exclaim the matron , “ what a very curious question from a single man .
What can you want to know for , Mr. Bumble ? ” The beadle drink his tea to the last drop ; finish a piece of toast ; whisk the crumb off his knee ; wipe his lip ; and deliberately kiss the matron .
“ Mr .
Bumble ! ” cry that discreet lady in a whisper ; for the fright be so great , that she have quite lose her voice , “ Mr .
Bumble , I shall scream ! ” Mr. Bumble make no reply ; but in a slow and dignified manner , put his arm round the matron ’ s waist .
As the lady have state her intention of scream , of course she would have scream at this additional boldness , but that the exertion be render unnecessary by a hasty knocking at the door : which be no sooner heard , than Mr. Bumble dart , with much agility , to the wine bottle , and begin dust them with great violence : while the matron sharply demand who be there .
It be worthy of remark , a a curious physical instance of the efficacy of a sudden surprise in counteract the effect of extreme fear , that her voice have quite recover all it official asperity .
“ If you please , mistress , ” say a withered old female pauper , hideously ugly : put her head in at the door , “ Old Sally be a-going fast. ” “ Well , what ’ s that to me ? ” angrily demand the matron .
“ I can ’ t keep her alive , can I ? ” “ No , no , mistress , ” reply the old woman , “ nobody can ; she ’ s far beyond the reach of help .
I ’ ve see a many people die ; little babe and great strong men ; and I know when death ’ s a-coming , well enough .
But she ’ s trouble in her mind : and when the fit be not on her , —and that ’ s not often , for she be die very hard , —she say she have get something to tell , which you must hear .
She ’ ll never die quiet till you come , mistress. ” At this intelligence , the worthy Mrs. Corney mutter a variety of invective against old woman who couldn ’ t even die without purposely annoy their better ; and , muffle herself in a thick shawl which she hastily catch up , briefly request Mr. Bumble to stay till she come back , l anything particular should occur .
Bidding the messenger walk fast , and not be all night hobble up the stair , she follow her from the room with a very ill grace , scold all the way .
Mr. Bumble ’ s conduct on be leave to himself , be rather inexplicable .
He open the closet , count the teaspoon , weigh the sugar-tongs , closely inspect a silver milk-pot to ascertain that it be of the genuine metal , and , have satisfy his curiosity on these point , put on his cocked hat corner-wise , and dance with much gravity four distinct time round the table .
Having go through this very extraordinary performance , he take off the cocked hat again , and , spread himself before the fire with his back towards it , seem to be mentally engage in take an exact inventory of the furniture .
CHAPTER XXIV .
TREATS ON A VERY POOR SUBJECT .
BUT IS A SHORT ONE , AND MAY BE FOUND OF IMPORTANCE IN THIS HISTORY It be no unfit messenger of death , who have disturb the quiet of the matron ’ s room .
Her body be bend by age ; her limb tremble with palsy ; her face , distort into a mumbling leer , resemble more the grotesque shaping of some wild pencil , than the work of Nature ’ s hand .
Alas !
How few of Nature ’ s face be leave alone to gladden u with their beauty !
The care , and sorrow , and hungerings , of the world , change them a they change heart ; and it be only when those passion sleep , and have lose their hold for ever , that the troubled cloud pass off , and leave Heaven ’ s surface clear .
It be a common thing for the countenance of the dead , even in that fixed and rigid state , to subside into the long-forgotten expression of sleep infancy , and settle into the very look of early life ; so calm , so peaceful , do they grow again , that those who know them in their happy childhood , kneel by the coffin ’ s side in awe , and see the Angel even upon earth .
The old crone totter along the passage , and up the stair , mutter some indistinct answer to the chiding of her companion ; be at length compel to pause for breath , she give the light into her hand , and remain behind to follow a she might : while the more nimble superior make her way to the room where the sick woman lay .
It be a bare garret-room , with a dim light burn at the farther end .
There be another old woman watching by the bed ; the parish apothecary ’ s apprentice be stand by the fire , make a toothpick out of a quill .
“ Cold night , Mrs. Corney , ” say this young gentleman , a the matron enter .
“ Very cold , indeed , sir , ” reply the mistress , in her most civil tone , and drop a curtsey a she speak .
“ You should get good coal out of your contractor , ” say the apothecary ’ s deputy , break a lump on the top of the fire with the rusty poker ; “ these be not at all the sort of thing for a cold night. ” “ They ’ re the board ’ s choosing , sir , ” return the matron .
“ The least they could do , would be to keep u pretty warm : for our place be hard enough. ” The conversation be here interrupt by a moan from the sick woman .
“ Oh ! ” say the young man , turn his face towards the bed , a if he have previously quite forget the patient , “ it ’ s all U.P .
there , Mrs. Corney. ” “ It be , be it , sir ? ” ask the matron .
“ If she last a couple of hour , I shall be surprise , ” say the apothecary ’ s apprentice , intent upon the toothpick ’ s point .
“ It ’ s a break-up of the system altogether .
Is she doze , old lady ? ” The attendant stoop over the bed , to ascertain ; and nod in the affirmative .
“ Then perhaps she ’ ll go off in that way , if you don ’ t make a row , ” say the young man .
“ Put the light on the floor .
She win ’ t see it there. ” The attendant do a she be tell : shake her head meanwhile , to intimate that the woman would not die so easily ; have do so , she resume her seat by the side of the other nurse , who have by this time return .
The mistress , with an expression of impatience , wrap herself in her shawl , and sit at the foot of the bed .
The apothecary ’ s apprentice , have complete the manufacture of the toothpick , plant himself in front of the fire and make good use of it for ten minute or so : when apparently grow rather dull , he wish Mrs. Corney joy of her job , and take himself off on tiptoe .
When they have sit in silence for some time , the two old woman rise from the bed , and crouch over the fire , hold out their withered hand to catch the heat .
The flame throw a ghastly light on their shrivelled face , and make their ugliness appear terrible , a , in this position , they begin to converse in a low voice .
“ Did she say any more , Anny dear , while I be go ? ” inquire the messenger .
“ Not a word , ” reply the other .
“ She pluck and tore at her arm for a little time ; but I hold her hand , and she soon drop off .
She hasn ’ t much strength in her , so I easily keep her quiet .
I ain ’ t so weak for an old woman , although I be on parish allowance ; no , no ! ” “ Did she drink the hot wine the doctor say she be to have ? ” demand the first .
“ I try to get it down , ” rejoin the other .
“ But her teeth be tight set , and she clench the mug so hard that it be as much a I could do to get it back again .
So I drink it ; and it do me good ! ” Looking cautiously round , to ascertain that they be not overheard , the two hag cower near to the fire , and chuckle heartily .
“ I mind the time , ” say the first speaker , “ when she would have do the same , and make rare fun of it afterwards. ” “ Ay , that she would , ” rejoin the other ; “ she have a merry heart .
“ A many , many , beautiful corps she lay out , a nice and neat a waxwork .
My old eye have see them—ay , and those old hand touch them too ; for I have help her , score of times. ” Stretching forth her tremble finger a she speak , the old creature shake them exultingly before her face , and fumble in her pocket , bring out an old time-discoloured tin snuff-box , from which she shake a few grain into the outstretched palm of her companion , and a few more into her own .
While they be thus employ , the matron , who have be impatiently watch until the die woman should awaken from her stupor , join them by the fire , and sharply ask how long she be to wait ?
“ Not long , mistress , ” reply the second woman , look up into her face .
“ We have none of u long to wait for Death .
Patience , patience !
He ’ ll be here soon enough for u all. ” “ Hold your tongue , you dot idiot ! ” say the matron sternly .
“ You , Martha , tell me ; have she be in this way before ? ” “ Often , ” answer the first woman .
“ But will never be again , ” add the second one ; “ that be , she ’ ll never wake again but once—and mind , mistress , that win ’ t be for long ! ” “ Long or short , ” say the matron , snappishly , “ she win ’ t find me here when she do wake ; take care , both of you , how you worry me again for nothing .
It ’ s no part of my duty to see all the old woman in the house die , and I win ’ t—that ’ s more .
Mind that , you impudent old harridan .
If you make a fool of me again , I ’ ll soon cure you , I warrant you ! ” She be bounce away , when a cry from the two woman , who have turn towards the bed , cause her to look round .
The patient have raise herself upright , and be stretch her arm towards them .
“ Who ’ s that ? ” she cry , in a hollow voice .
“ Hush , hush ! ” say one of the woman , stoop over her .
“ Lie down , lie down ! ” “ I ’ ll never lie down again alive ! ” say the woman , struggle .
“ I _will_ tell her !
Come here !
Nearer !
Let me whisper in your ear. ” She clutch the matron by the arm , and force her into a chair by the bedside , be about to speak , when look round , she catch sight of the two old woman bend forward in the attitude of eager listener .
“ Turn them away , ” say the woman , drowsily ; “ make haste !
make haste ! ” The two old crone , chime in together , begin pour out many piteous lamentation that the poor dear be too far go to know her best friend ; and be utter sundry protestation that they would never leave her , when the superior push them from the room , close the door , and return to the bedside .
On be exclude , the old lady change their tone , and cry through the keyhole that old Sally be drunk ; which , indeed , be not unlikely ; since , in addition to a moderate dose of opium prescribe by the apothecary , she be labour under the effect of a final taste of gin-and-water which have be privily administer , in the openness of their heart , by the worthy old lady themselves .
“ Now listen to me , ” say the die woman aloud , a if make a great effort to revive one latent spark of energy .
“ In this very room—in this very bed—I once nurse a pretty young creetur ’ , that be bring into the house with her foot cut and bruise with walking , and all soil with dust and blood .
She give birth to a boy , and die .
Let me think—what be the year again ! ” “ Never mind the year , ” say the impatient auditor ; “ what about her ? ” “ Ay , ” murmur the sick woman , relapse into her former drowsy state , “ what about her ? —what about—I know ! ” she cry , jump fiercely up : her face flush , and her eye start from her head— “ I rob her , so I do !
She wasn ’ t cold—I tell you she wasn ’ t cold , when I steal it ! ” “ Stole what , for God ’ s sake ? ” cry the matron , with a gesture a if she would call for help .
“ _It_ ! ” reply the woman , lay her hand over the other ’ s mouth .
“ The only thing she have .
She want clothes to keep her warm , and food to eat ; but she have keep it safe , and have it in her bosom .
It be gold , I tell you !
Rich gold , that might have save her life ! ” “ Gold ! ” echo the matron , bend eagerly over the woman a she fell back .
“ Go on , go on—yes—what of it ?
Who be the mother ?
When be it ? ” “ She charge me to keep it safe , ” reply the woman with a groan , “ and trust me a the only woman about her .
I steal it in my heart when she first show it me hang round her neck ; and the child ’ s death , perhaps , be on me besides !
They would have treat him well , if they have know it all ! ” “ Known what ? ” ask the other .
“ Speak ! ” “ The boy grow so like his mother , ” say the woman , ramble on , and not heed the question , “ that I could never forget it when I saw his face .
Poor girl !
poor girl !
She be so young , too !
Such a gentle lamb !
Wait ; there ’ s more to tell .
I have not tell you all , have I ? ” “ No , no , ” reply the matron , incline her head to catch the word , a they come more faintly from the die woman .
“ Be quick , or it may be too late ! ” “ The mother , ” say the woman , make a more violent effort than before ; “ the mother , when the pain of death first come upon her , whisper in my ear that if her baby be bear alive , and thrive , the day might come when it would not feel so much disgrace to hear it poor young mother name .
‘ And oh , kind Heaven ! ’ she say , fold her thin hand together , ‘ whether it be boy or girl , raise up some friend for it in this troubled world , and take pity upon a lonely desolate child , abandon to it mercy ! ’ ” “ The boy ’ s name ? ” demand the matron .
“ They _called_ him Oliver , ” reply the woman , feebly .
“ The gold I steal was— ” “ Yes , yes—what ? ” cry the other .
She be bend eagerly over the woman to hear her reply ; but draw back , instinctively , a she once again rise , slowly and stiffly , into a sitting posture ; then , clutch the coverlid with both hand , mutter some indistinct sound in her throat , and fell lifeless on the bed .
“ Stone dead ! ” say one of the old woman , hurry in as soon a the door be open .
“ And nothing to tell , after all , ” rejoin the matron , walk carelessly away .
The two crone , to all appearance , too busily occupy in the preparation for their dreadful duty to make any reply , be leave alone , hover about the body .
CHAPTER XXV .
WHEREIN THIS HISTORY REVERTS TO MR. FAGIN AND COMPANY While these thing be pass in the country workhouse , Mr. Fagin sit in the old den—the same from which Oliver have be remove by the girl—brooding over a dull , smoky fire .
He hold a pair of bellow upon his knee , with which he have apparently be endeavour to rouse it into more cheerful action ; but he have fall into deep thought ; and with his arm fold on them , and his chin rest on his thumb , fix his eye , abstractedly , on the rusty bar .
At a table behind him sit the Artful Dodger , Master Charles Bates , and Mr. Chitling : all intent upon a game of whist ; the Artful take dummy against Master Bates and Mr. Chitling .
The countenance of the first-named gentleman , peculiarly intelligent at all time , acquire great additional interest from his close observance of the game , and his attentive perusal of Mr. Chitling ’ s hand ; upon which , from time to time , a occasion serve , he bestow a variety of earnest glance : wisely regulate his own play by the result of his observation upon his neighbour ’ s card .
It be a cold night , the Dodger wear his hat , a , indeed , be often his custom within door .
He also sustain a clay pipe between his teeth , which he only remove for a brief space when he deem it necessary to apply for refreshment to a quart pot upon the table , which stand ready fill with gin-and-water for the accommodation of the company .
Master Bates be also attentive to the play ; but be of a more excitable nature than his accomplished friend , it be observable that he more frequently apply himself to the gin-and-water , and moreover indulge in many jest and irrelevant remark , all highly unbecoming a scientific rubber .
Indeed , the Artful , presume upon their close attachment , more than once take occasion to reason gravely with his companion upon these impropriety ; all of which remonstrance , Master Bates receive in extremely good part ; merely request his friend to be “ blow , ” or to insert his head in a sack , or reply with some other neatly-turned witticism of a similar kind , the happy application of which , excite considerable admiration in the mind of Mr. Chitling .
It be remarkable that the latter gentleman and his partner invariably lose ; and that the circumstance , so far from anger Master Bates , appear to afford him the high amusement , inasmuch a he laugh most uproariously at the end of every deal , and protest that he have never see such a jolly game in all his born day .
“ That ’ s two double and the rub , ” say Mr. Chitling , with a very long face , a he draw half-a-crown from his waistcoat-pocket .
“ I never see such a feller a you , Jack ; you win everything .
Even when we ’ ve good card , Charley and I can ’ t make nothing of ’ em. ” Either the master or the manner of this remark , which be make very ruefully , delight Charley Bates so much , that his consequent shout of laughter rouse the Jew from his reverie , and induce him to inquire what be the matter .
“ Matter , Fagin ! ” cry Charley .
“ I wish you have watch the play .
Tommy Chitling hasn ’ t win a point ; and I go partner with him against the Artfull and dumb. ” “ Ay , ay ! ” say the Jew , with a grin , which sufficiently demonstrate that he be at no loss to understand the reason .
“ Try ’ em again , Tom ; try ’ em again. ” “ No more of it for me , thank ’ ee , Fagin , ” reply Mr. Chitling ; “ I ’ ve have enough .
That ’ ere Dodger have such a run of luck that there ’ s no stand again ’ him. ” “ Ha !
ha !
my dear , ” reply the Jew , “ you must get up very early in the morning , to win against the Dodger. ” “ Morning ! ” say Charley Bates ; “ you must put your boot on over-night , and have a telescope at each eye , and a opera-glass between your shoulder , if you want to come over him. ” Mr. Dawkins receive these handsome compliment with much philosophy , and offer to cut any gentleman in company , for the first picture-card , at a shilling at a time .
Nobody accept the challenge , and his pipe be by this time smoke out , he proceed to amuse himself by sketch a ground-plan of Newgate on the table with the piece of chalk which have serve him in lieu of counter ; whistle , meantime , with peculiar shrillness .
“ How precious dull you be , Tommy ! ” say the Dodger , stop short when there have be a long silence ; and address Mr. Chitling .
“ What do you think he ’ s thinking of , Fagin ? ” “ How should I know , my dear ? ” reply the Jew , look round a he ply the bellow .
“ About his loss , maybe ; or the little retirement in the country that he ’ s just leave , eh ?
Ha !
ha !
Is that it , my dear ? ” “ Not a bit of it , ” reply the Dodger , stop the subject of discourse a Mr. Chitling be about to reply .
“ What do _you_ say , Charley ? ” “ _I_ should say , ” reply Master Bates , with a grin , “ that he be uncommon sweet upon Betsy .
See how he ’ s a-blushing !
Oh , my eye !
here ’ s a merry-go-rounder !
Tommy Chitling ’ s in love !
Oh , Fagin , Fagin !
what a spree ! ” Thoroughly overpower with the notion of Mr. Chitling be the victim of the tender passion , Master Bates throw himself back in his chair with such violence , that he lose his balance , and pitch over upon the floor ; where ( the accident abate nothing of his merriment ) he lay at full length until his laugh be over , when he resume his former position , and begin another laugh .
“ Never mind him , my dear , ” say the Jew , wink at Mr. Dawkins , and give Master Bates a reprove tap with the nozzle of the bellow .
“ Betsy ’ s a fine girl .
Stick up to her , Tom .
Stick up to her. ” “ What I mean to say , Fagin , ” reply Mr. Chitling , very red in the face , “ be , that that isn ’ t anything to anybody here. ” “ No more it be , ” reply the Jew ; “ Charley will talk .
Don ’ t mind him , my dear ; don ’ t mind him .
Betsy ’ s a fine girl .
Do a she bid you , Tom , and you will make your fortune. ” “ So I _do_ do a she bid me , ” reply Mr. Chitling ; “ I shouldn ’ t have be mill , if it hadn ’ t be for her advice .
But it turn out a good job for you ; didn ’ t it , Fagin !
And what ’ s six week of it ?
It must come , some time or another , and why not in the winter time when you don ’ t want to go out a-walking so much ; eh , Fagin ? ” “ Ah , to be sure , my dear , ” reply the Jew .
“ You wouldn ’ t mind it again , Tom , would you , ” ask the Dodger , wink upon Charley and the Jew , “ if Bet be all right ? ” “ I mean to say that I shouldn ’ t , ” reply Tom , angrily .
“ There , now .
Ah !
Who ’ ll say as much a that , I should like to know ; eh , Fagin ? ” “ Nobody , my dear , ” reply the Jew ; “ not a soul , Tom .
I don ’ t know one of ’ em that would do it besides you ; not one of ’ em , my dear. ” “ I might have get clear off , if I ’ d split upon her ; mightn ’ t I , Fagin ? ” angrily pursue the poor half-witted dupe .
“ A word from me would have do it ; wouldn ’ t it , Fagin ? ” “ To be sure it would , my dear , ” reply the Jew .
“ But I didn ’ t blab it ; do I , Fagin ? ” demand Tom , pour question upon question with great volubility .
“ No , no , to be sure , ” reply the Jew ; “ you be too stout-hearted for that .
A deal too stout , my dear ! ” “ Perhaps I be , ” rejoin Tom , look round ; “ and if I be , what ’ s to laugh at , in that ; eh , Fagin ? ” The Jew , perceive that Mr. Chitling be considerably rouse , hasten to assure him that nobody be laugh ; and to prove the gravity of the company , appeal to Master Bates , the principal offender .
But , unfortunately , Charley , in open his mouth to reply that he be never more serious in his life , be unable to prevent the escape of such a violent roar , that the abused Mr. Chitling , without any preliminary ceremony , rush across the room and aim a blow at the offender ; who , be skilful in evade pursuit , duck to avoid it , and choose his time so well that it light on the chest of the merry old gentleman , and cause him to stagger to the wall , where he stand pant for breath , while Mr. Chitling look on in intense dismay .
“ Hark ! ” cry the Dodger at this moment , “ I hear the tinkler. ” Catching up the light , he creep softly upstairs .
The bell be rung again , with some impatience , while the party be in darkness .
After a short pause , the Dodger reappear , and whisper Fagin mysteriously .
“ What ! ” cry the Jew , “ alone ? ” The Dodger nod in the affirmative , and , shade the flame of the candle with his hand , give Charley Bates a private intimation , in dumb show , that he have well not be funny just then .
Having perform this friendly office , he fix his eye on the Jew ’ s face , and await his direction .
The old man bite his yellow finger , and meditate for some second ; his face work with agitation the while , a if he dread something , and fear to know the bad .
At length he raise his head .
“ Where be he ? ” he ask .
The Dodger point to the floor above , and make a gesture , a if to leave the room .
“ Yes , ” say the Jew , answer the mute inquiry ; “ bring him down .
Hush !
Quiet , Charley !
Gently , Tom !
Scarce , scarce ! ” This brief direction to Charley Bates , and his recent antagonist , be softly and immediately obey .
There be no sound of their whereabout , when the Dodger descend the stair , bear the light in his hand , and follow by a man in a coarse smock-frock ; who , after cast a hurried glance round the room , pull off a large wrapper which have conceal the low portion of his face , and disclose : all haggard , unwashed , and unshorn : the feature of flash Toby Crackit .
“ How be you , Faguey ? ” say this worthy , nod to the Jew .
“ Pop that shawl away in my castor , Dodger , so that I may know where to find it when I cut ; that ’ s the time of day !
You ’ ll be a fine young cracksman afore the old file now. ” With these word he pull up the smock-frock ; and , wind it round his middle , draw a chair to the fire , and place his foot upon the hob .
“ See there , Faguey , ” he say , point disconsolately to his top boot ; “ not a drop of Day and Martin since you know when ; not a bubble of blacking , by Jove !
But don ’ t look at me in that way , man .
All in good time .
I can ’ t talk about business till I ’ ve eat and drank ; so produce the sustainance , and let ’ s have a quiet fill-out for the first time these three day ! ” The Jew motion to the Dodger to place what eatables there be , upon the table ; and , seat himself opposite the housebreaker , wait his leisure .
To judge from appearance , Toby be by no mean in a hurry to open the conversation .
At first , the Jew content himself with patiently watch his countenance , a if to gain from it expression some clue to the intelligence he bring ; but in vain .
He look tired and worn , but there be the same complacent repose upon his feature that they always wear : and through dirt , and beard , and whisker , there still shone , unimpaired , the self-satisfied smirk of flash Toby Crackit .
Then the Jew , in an agony of impatience , watch every morsel he put into his mouth ; pace up and down the room , meanwhile , in irrepressible excitement .
It be all of no use .
Toby continue to eat with the utmost outward indifference , until he could eat no more ; then , order the Dodger out , he close the door , mix a glass of spirit and water , and compose himself for talk .
“ First and foremost , Faguey , ” say Toby .
“ Yes , yes ! ” interpose the Jew , draw up his chair .
Mr. Crackit stop to take a draught of spirit and water , and to declare that the gin be excellent ; then place his foot against the low mantelpiece , so a to bring his boot to about the level of his eye , he quietly resume .
“ First and foremost , Faguey , ” say the housebreaker , “ how ’ s Bill ? ” “ What ! ” scream the Jew , start from his seat .
“ Why , you don ’ t mean to say— ” begin Toby , turn pale .
“ Mean ! ” cry the Jew , stamp furiously on the ground .
“ Where be they ?
Sikes and the boy !
Where be they ?
Where have they be ?
Where be they hide ?
Why have they not be here ? ” “ The crack fail , ” say Toby faintly .
“ I know it , ” reply the Jew , tear a newspaper from his pocket and point to it .
“ What more ? ” “ They fire and hit the boy .
We cut over the field at the back , with him between us—straight a the crow flies—through hedge and ditch .
They give chase .
Damme !
the whole country be awake , and the dog upon us. ” “ The boy ! ” “ Bill have him on his back , and scud like the wind .
We stop to take him between u ; his head hang down , and he be cold .
They be close upon our heel ; every man for himself , and each from the gallows !
We part company , and leave the youngster lie in a ditch .
Alive or dead , that ’ s all I know about him. ” The Jew stop to hear no more ; but utter a loud yell , and twin his hand in his hair , rush from the room , and from the house .
CHAPTER XXVI .
IN WHICH A MYSTERIOUS CHARACTER APPEARS UPON THE SCENE ; AND MANY THINGS , INSEPARABLE FROM THIS HISTORY , ARE DONE AND PERFORMED The old man have gain the street corner , before he begin to recover the effect of Toby Crackit ’ s intelligence .
He have relax nothing of his unusual speed ; but be still press onward , in the same wild and disordered manner , when the sudden dashing past of a carriage : and a boisterous cry from the foot passenger , who saw his danger : drive him back upon the pavement .
Avoiding , as much a be possible , all the main street , and skulk only through the by-ways and alley , he at length emerge on Snow Hill .
Here he walk even faster than before ; nor do he linger until he have again turn into a court ; when , a if conscious that he be now in his proper element , he fell into his usual shuffling pace , and seem to breathe more freely .
Near to the spot on which Snow Hill and Holborn Hill meet , open , upon the right hand a you come out of the City , a narrow and dismal alley , lead to Saffron Hill .
In it filthy shop be expose for sale huge bunch of second-hand silk handkerchief , of all size and pattern ; for here reside the trader who purchase them from pick-pockets .
Hundreds of these handkerchief hang dangle from pegs outside the window or flaunt from the door-posts ; and the shelf , within , be pile with them .
Confined a the limit of Field Lane be , it have it barber , it coffee-shop , it beer-shop , and it fried-fish warehouse .
It be a commercial colony of itself : the emporium of petty larceny : visit at early morning , and setting-in of dusk , by silent merchant , who traffic in dark back-parlours , and who go as strangely a they come .
Here , the clothesman , the shoe-vamper , and the rag-merchant , display their good , a sign-boards to the petty thief ; here , store of old iron and bone , and heap of mildewy fragment of woollen-stuff and linen , rust and rot in the grimy cellar .
It be into this place that the Jew turn .
He be well know to the sallow denizen of the lane ; for such of them a be on the look-out to buy or sell , nod , familiarly , a he pass along .
He reply to their salutation in the same way ; but bestow no closer recognition until he reach the further end of the alley ; when he stop , to address a salesman of small stature , who have squeeze as much of his person into a child ’ s chair a the chair would hold , and be smoke a pipe at his warehouse door .
“ Why , the sight of you , Mr. Fagin , would cure the hoptalmy ! ” say this respectable trader , in acknowledgment of the Jew ’ s inquiry after his health .
“ The neighbourhood be a little too hot , Lively , ” say Fagin , elevate his eyebrow , and cross his hand upon his shoulder .
“ Well , I ’ ve heerd that complaint of it , once or twice before , ” reply the trader ; “ but it soon cool down again ; don ’ t you find it so ? ” Fagin nod in the affirmative .
Pointing in the direction of Saffron Hill , he inquire whether any one be up yonder to-night .
“ At the Cripples ? ” inquire the man .
The Jew nod .
“ Let me see , ” pursue the merchant , reflect .
“ Yes , there ’ s some half-dozen of ’ em go in , that I know .
I don ’ t think your friend ’ s there. ” “ Sikes be not , I suppose ? ” inquire the Jew , with a disappointed countenance .
“ _Non istwentus_ , a the lawyer say , ” reply the little man , shake his head , and look amazingly sly .
“ Have you get anything in my line to-night ? ” “ Nothing to-night , ” say the Jew , turn away .
“ Are you go up to the Cripples , Fagin ? ” cry the little man , call after him .
“ Stop !
I don ’ t mind if I have a drop there with you ! ” But a the Jew , look back , wave his hand to intimate that he prefer be alone ; and , moreover , a the little man could not very easily disengage himself from the chair ; the sign of the Cripples be , for a time , bereft of the advantage of Mr. Lively ’ s presence .
By the time he have get upon his leg , the Jew have disappear ; so Mr. Lively , after ineffectually stand on tiptoe , in the hope of catch sight of him , again force himself into the little chair , and , exchange a shake of the head with a lady in the opposite shop , in which doubt and mistrust be plainly mingle , resume his pipe with a grave demeanour .
The Three Cripples , or rather the Cripples ; which be the sign by which the establishment be familiarly know to it patron : be the public-house in which Mr. Sikes and his dog have already figure .
Merely make a sign to a man at the bar , Fagin walk straight upstairs , and open the door of a room , and softly insinuate himself into the chamber , look anxiously about : shade his eye with his hand , a if in search of some particular person .
The room be illuminate by two gas-lights ; the glare of which be prevent by the barred shutter , and closely-drawn curtain of faded red , from be visible outside .
The ceiling be blacken , to prevent it colour from be injure by the flaring of the lamp ; and the place be so full of dense tobacco smoke , that at first it be scarcely possible to discern anything more .
By degree , however , a some of it clear away through the open door , an assemblage of head , as confuse a the noise that greet the ear , might be make out ; and a the eye grow more accustomed to the scene , the spectator gradually become aware of the presence of a numerous company , male and female , crowd round a long table : at the upper end of which , sit a chairman with a hammer of office in his hand ; while a professional gentleman with a bluish nose , and his face tie up for the benefit of a toothache , preside at a jingle piano in a remote corner .
As Fagin step softly in , the professional gentleman , run over the key by way of prelude , occasion a general cry of order for a song ; which have subside , a young lady proceed to entertain the company with a ballad in four verse , between each of which the accompanyist play the melody all through , as loud a he could .
When this be over , the chairman give a sentiment , after which , the professional gentleman on the chairman ’ s right and leave volunteer a duet , and sing it , with great applause .
It be curious to observe some face which stand out prominently from among the group .
There be the chairman himself , ( the landlord of the house , ) a coarse , rough , heavy build fellow , who , while the song be proceed , roll his eye hither and thither , and , seem to give himself up to joviality , have an eye for everything that be do , and an ear for everything that be said—and sharp one , too .
Near him be the singer : receiving , with professional indifference , the compliment of the company , and apply themselves , in turn , to a dozen proffered glass of spirit and water , tender by their more boisterous admirer ; whose countenance , expressive of almost every vice in almost every grade , irresistibly attract the attention , by their very repulsiveness .
Cunning , ferocity , and drunkeness in all it stage , be there , in their strong aspect ; and woman : some with the last lingering tinge of their early freshness almost fading a you look : others with every mark and stamp of their sex utterly beat out , and present but one loathsome blank of profligacy and crime ; some mere girl , others but young woman , and none past the prime of life ; form the darkest and sad portion of this dreary picture .
Fagin , trouble by no grave emotion , look eagerly from face to face while these proceeding be in progress ; but apparently without meet that of which he be in search .
Succeeding , at length , in catch the eye of the man who occupy the chair , he beckon to him slightly , and leave the room , as quietly a he have enter it .
“ What can I do for you , Mr. Fagin ? ” inquire the man , a he follow him out to the landing .
“ Won ’ t you join u ?
They ’ ll be delight , every one of ’ em. ” The Jew shake his head impatiently , and say in a whisper , “ Is _he_ here ? ” “ No , ” reply the man .
“ And no news of Barney ? ” inquire Fagin .
“ None , ” reply the landlord of the Cripples ; for it be he .
“ He win ’ t stir till it ’ s all safe .
Depend on it , they ’ re on the scent down there ; and that if he move , he ’ d blow upon the thing at once .
He ’ s all right enough , Barney be , else I should have hear of him .
I ’ ll pound it , that Barney ’ s manage properly .
Let him alone for that. ” “ Will _he_ be here to-night ? ” ask the Jew , lay the same emphasis on the pronoun a before .
“ Monks , do you mean ? ” inquire the landlord , hesitate .
“ Hush ! ” say the Jew .
“ Yes. ” “ Certain , ” reply the man , draw a gold watch from his fob ; “ I expect him here before now .
If you ’ ll wait ten minute , he ’ ll be— ” “ No , no , ” say the Jew , hastily ; a though , however desirous he might be to see the person in question , he be nevertheless relieve by his absence .
“ Tell him I come here to see him ; and that he must come to me to-night .
No , say to-morrow .
As he be not here , to-morrow will be time enough. ” “ Good ! ” say the man .
“ Nothing more ? ” “ Not a word now , ” say the Jew , descend the stair .
“ I say , ” say the other , look over the rail , and speak in a hoarse whisper ; “ what a time this would be for a sell !
I ’ ve get Phil Barker here : so drunk , that a boy might take him ! ” “ Ah !
But it ’ s not Phil Barker ’ s time , ” say the Jew , look up .
“ Phil have something more to do , before we can afford to part with him ; so go back to the company , my dear , and tell them to lead merry lives—_while they last_ .
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” The landlord reciprocate the old man ’ s laugh ; and return to his guest .
The Jew be no sooner alone , than his countenance resume it former expression of anxiety and thought .
After a brief reflection , he call a hack-cabriolet , and bid the man drive towards Bethnal Green .
He dismiss him within some quarter of a mile of Mr. Sikes ’ s residence , and perform the short remainder of the distance , on foot .
“ Now , ” mutter the Jew , a he knock at the door , “ if there be any deep play here , I shall have it out of you , my girl , cunning a you are. ” She be in her room , the woman say .
Fagin creep softly upstairs , and enter it without any previous ceremony .
The girl be alone ; lie with her head upon the table , and her hair straggling over it .
“ She have be drink , ” think the Jew , cooly , “ or perhaps she be only miserable. ” The old man turn to close the door , a he make this reflection ; the noise thus occasion , rouse the girl .
She eye his crafty face narrowly , a she inquire to his recital of Toby Crackit ’ s story .
When it be conclude , she sink into her former attitude , but speak not a word .
She push the candle impatiently away ; and once or twice a she feverishly change her position , shuffle her foot upon the ground ; but this be all .
During the silence , the Jew look restlessly about the room , a if to assure himself that there be no appearance of Sikes have covertly return .
Apparently satisfy with his inspection , he cough twice or thrice , and make a many effort to open a conversation ; but the girl heed him no more than if he have be make of stone .
At length he make another attempt ; and rub his hand together , say , in his most conciliatory tone , “ And where should you think Bill be now , my dear ? ” The girl moan out some half intelligible reply , that she could not tell ; and seem , from the smothered noise that escape her , to be cry .
“ And the boy , too , ” say the Jew , strain his eye to catch a glimpse of her face .
“ Poor leetle child !
Left in a ditch , Nance ; only think ! ” “ The child , ” say the girl , suddenly look up , “ be well where he be , than among u ; and if no harm come to Bill from it , I hope he lie dead in the ditch and that his young bone may rot there. ” “ What ! ” cry the Jew , in amazement .
“ Ay , I do , ” return the girl , meet his gaze .
“ I shall be glad to have him away from my eye , and to know that the bad be over .
I can ’ t bear to have him about me .
The sight of him turn me against myself , and all of you. ” “ Pooh ! ” say the Jew , scornfully .
“ You ’ re drunk. ” “ Am I ? ” cry the girl bitterly .
“ It ’ s no fault of yours , if I be not !
You ’ d never have me anything else , if you have your will , except now ; —the humour doesn ’ t suit you , doesn ’ t it ? ” “ No ! ” rejoin the Jew , furiously .
“ It do not. ” “ Change it , then ! ” respond the girl , with a laugh .
“ Change it ! ” exclaim the Jew , exasperate beyond all bound by his companion ’ s unexpected obstinacy , and the vexation of the night , “ I _will_ change it !
Listen to me , you drab .
Listen to me , who with six word , can strangle Sikes as surely a if I have his bull ’ s throat between my finger now .
If he come back , and leave the boy behind him ; if he get off free , and dead or alive , fail to restore him to me ; murder him yourself if you would have him escape Jack Ketch .
And do it the moment he set foot in this room , or mind me , it will be too late ! ” “ What be all this ? ” cry the girl involuntarily .
“ What be it ? ” pursue Fagin , mad with rage .
“ When the boy ’ s worth hundred of pound to me , be I to lose what chance throw me in the way of get safely , through the whim of a drunken gang that I could whistle away the life of !
And me bound , too , to a bear devil that only want the will , and have the power to , to— ” Panting for breath , the old man stammer for a word ; and in that instant check the torrent of his wrath , and change his whole demeanour .
A moment before , his clenched hand have grasp the air ; his eye have dilate ; and his face grow livid with passion ; but now , he shrink into a chair , and , cower together , tremble with the apprehension of have himself disclose some hidden villainy .
After a short silence , he venture to look round at his companion .
He appear somewhat reassured , on behold her in the same listless attitude from which he have first rouse her .
“ Nancy , dear ! ” croak the Jew , in his usual voice .
“ Did you mind me , dear ? ” “ Don ’ t worry me now , Fagin ! ” reply the girl , raise her head languidly .
“ If Bill have not do it this time , he will another .
He have do many a good job for you , and will do many more when he can ; and when he can ’ t he win ’ t ; so no more about that. ” “ Regarding this boy , my dear ? ” say the Jew , rub the palm of his hand nervously together .
“ The boy must take his chance with the rest , ” interrupt Nancy , hastily ; “ and I say again , I hope he be dead , and out of harm ’ s way , and out of yours , —that be , if Bill come to no harm .
And if Toby get clear off , Bill ’ s pretty sure to be safe ; for Bill ’ s worth two of Toby any time. ” “ And about what I be say , my dear ? ” observe the Jew , keep his glisten eye steadily upon her .
“ You must say it all over again , if it ’ s anything you want me to do , ” rejoined Nancy ; “ and if it be , you have good wait till to-morrow .
You put me up for a minute ; but now I ’ m stupid again. ” Fagin put several other question : all with the same drift of ascertain whether the girl have profit by his unguarded hint ; but , she answer them so readily , and be withal so utterly unmoved by his search look , that his original impression of her be more than a trifle in liquor , be confirm .
Nancy , indeed , be not exempt from a fail which be very common among the Jew ’ s female pupil ; and in which , in their tenderer year , they be rather encourage than checked .
Her disordered appearance , and a wholesale perfume of Geneva which pervade the apartment , afford strong confirmatory evidence of the justice of the Jew ’ s supposition ; and when , after indulge in the temporary display of violence above described , she subside , first into dullness , and afterwards into a compound of feeling : under the influence of which she shed tear one minute , and in the next give utterance to various exclamation of “ Never say die ! ” and diver calculation a to what might be the amount of the odds so long a a lady or gentleman be happy , Mr. Fagin , who have have considerable experience of such matter in his time , saw , with great satisfaction , that she be very far go indeed .
Having ease his mind by this discovery ; and have accomplish his twofold object of impart to the girl what he have , that night , heard , and of ascertain , with his own eye , that Sikes have not return , Mr. Fagin again turn his face homeward : leave his young friend asleep , with her head upon the table .
It be within an hour of midnight .
The weather be dark , and pierce cold , he have no great temptation to loiter .
The sharp wind that scour the street , seem to have clear them of passenger , a of dust and mud , for few people be abroad , and they be to all appearance hasten fast home .
It blow from the right quarter for the Jew , however , and straight before it he go : trembling , and shiver , a every fresh gust drive him rudely on his way .
He have reach the corner of his own street , and be already fumble in his pocket for the door-key , when a dark figure emerge from a projecting entrance which lay in deep shadow , and , cross the road , glide up to him unperceived .
“ Fagin ! ” whisper a voice close to his ear .
“ Ah ! ” say the Jew , turn quickly round , “ be that— ” “ Yes ! ” interrupt the stranger .
“ I have be linger here these two hour .
Where the devil have you be ? ” “ On your business , my dear , ” reply the Jew , glance uneasily at his companion , and slacken his pace a he speak .
“ On your business all night. ” “ Oh , of course ! ” say the stranger , with a sneer .
“ Well ; and what ’ s come of it ? ” “ Nothing good , ” say the Jew .
“ Nothing bad , I hope ? ” say the stranger , stop short , and turn a startled look on his companion .
The Jew shake his head , and be about to reply , when the stranger , interrupt him , motion to the house , before which they have by this time arrive : remarking , that he have well say what he have get to say , under cover : for his blood be chill with stand about so long , and the wind blow through him .
Fagin look a if he could have willingly excuse himself from take home a visitor at that unseasonable hour ; and , indeed , mutter something about have no fire ; but his companion repeat his request in a peremptory manner , he unlock the door , and request him to close it softly , while he get a light .
“ It ’ s as dark a the grave , ” say the man , grope forward a few step .
“ Make haste ! ” “ Shut the door , ” whisper Fagin from the end of the passage .
As he speak , it close with a loud noise .
“ That wasn ’ t my do , ” say the other man , feel his way .
“ The wind blow it to , or it shut of it own accord : one or the other .
Look sharp with the light , or I shall knock my brain out against something in this confounded hole. ” Fagin stealthily descend the kitchen stair .
After a short absence , he return with a lighted candle , and the intelligence that Toby Crackit be asleep in the back room below , and that the boy be in the front one .
Beckoning the man to follow him , he lead the way upstairs .
“ We can say the few word we ’ ve get to say in here , my dear , ” say the Jew , throw open a door on the first floor ; “ and a there be hole in the shutter , and we never show light to our neighbour , we ’ ll set the candle on the stair .
There ! ” With those word , the Jew , stoop down , place the candle on an upper flight of stair , exactly opposite to the room door .
This do , he lead the way into the apartment ; which be destitute of all movable save a broken arm-chair , and an old couch or sofa without cover , which stand behind the door .
Upon this piece of furniture , the stranger sit himself with the air of a weary man ; and the Jew , draw up the arm-chair opposite , they sit face to face .
It be not quite dark ; the door be partially open ; and the candle outside , throw a feeble reflection on the opposite wall .
They converse for some time in whisper .
Though nothing of the conversation be distinguishable beyond a few disjointed word here and there , a listener might easily have perceive that Fagin appear to be defend himself against some remark of the stranger ; and that the latter be in a state of considerable irritation .
They might have be talk , thus , for a quarter of an hour or more , when Monks—by which name the Jew have designate the strange man several time in the course of their colloquy—said , raise his voice a little , “ I tell you again , it be badly plan .
Why not have keep him here among the rest , and make a sneaking , snivel pickpocket of him at once ? ” “ Only hear him ! ” exclaim the Jew , shrug his shoulder .
“ Why , do you mean to say you couldn ’ t have do it , if you have choose ? ” demand Monks , sternly .
“ Haven ’ t you do it , with other boy , score of time ?
If you have have patience for a twelvemonth , at most , couldn ’ t you have get him convict , and send safely out of the kingdom ; perhaps for life ? ” “ Whose turn would that have serve , my dear ? ” inquire the Jew humbly .
“ Mine , ” reply Monks .
“ But not mine , ” say the Jew , submissively .
“ He might have become of use to me .
When there be two party to a bargain , it be only reasonable that the interest of both should be consult ; be it , my good friend ? ” “ What then ? ” demand Monks .
“ I saw it be not easy to train him to the business , ” reply the Jew ; “ he be not like other boy in the same circumstances. ” “ Curse him , no ! ” mutter the man , “ or he would have be a thief , long ago. ” “ I have no hold upon him to make him bad , ” pursue the Jew , anxiously watch the countenance of his companion .
“ His hand be not in .
I have nothing to frighten him with ; which we always must have in the beginning , or we labour in vain .
What could I do ?
Send him out with the Dodger and Charley ?
We have enough of that , at first , my dear ; I tremble for u all. ” “ _That_ be not my do , ” observe Monks .
“ No , no , my dear ! ” renew the Jew .
“ And I don ’ t quarrel with it now ; because , if it have never happen , you might never have clap eye on the boy to notice him , and so lead to the discovery that it be him you be look for .
Well !
I get him back for you by mean of the girl ; and then _she_ begin to favour him. ” “ Throttle the girl ! ” say Monks , impatiently .
“ Why , we can ’ t afford to do that just now , my dear , ” reply the Jew , smile ; “ and , besides , that sort of thing be not in our way ; or , one of these day , I might be glad to have it do .
I know what these girl be , Monks , well .
As soon a the boy begin to harden , she ’ ll care no more for him , than for a block of wood .
You want him make a thief .
If he be alive , I can make him one from this time ; and , if—if— ” say the Jew , draw nearer to the other , — “ it ’ s not likely , mind , —but if the bad come to the bad , and he be dead— ” “ It ’ s no fault of mine if he be ! ” interpose the other man , with a look of terror , and clasp the Jew ’ s arm with tremble hand .
“ Mind that .
Fagin !
I have no hand in it .
Anything but his death , I tell you from the first .
I win ’ t shed blood ; it ’ s always find out , and haunt a man besides .
If they shoot him dead , I be not the cause ; do you hear me ?
Fire this infernal den !
What ’ s that ? ” “ What ! ” cry the Jew , grasp the coward round the body , with both arm , a he spring to his foot .
“ Where ? ” “ Yonder !
reply the man , glare at the opposite wall .
“ The shadow !
I saw the shadow of a woman , in a cloak and bonnet , pas along the wainscot like a breath ! ” The Jew release his hold , and they rush tumultuously from the room .
The candle , waste by the draught , be stand where it have be place .
It show them only the empty staircase , and their own white face .
They listen intently : a profound silence reign throughout the house .
“ It ’ s your fancy , ” say the Jew , take up the light and turn to his companion .
“ I ’ ll swear I saw it ! ” reply Monks , tremble .
“ It be bend forward when I saw it first ; and when I speak , it dart away. ” The Jew glance contemptuously at the pale face of his associate , and , tell him he could follow , if he please , ascend the stair .
They look into all the room ; they be cold , bare , and empty .
They descend into the passage , and thence into the cellar below .
The green damp hung upon the low wall ; the track of the snail and slug glisten in the light of the candle ; but all be still a death .
“ What do you think now ? ” say the Jew , when they have regain the passage .
“ Besides ourselves , there ’ s not a creature in the house except Toby and the boy ; and they ’ re safe enough .
See here ! ” As a proof of the fact , the Jew draw forth two key from his pocket ; and explain , that when he first go downstairs , he have lock them in , to prevent any intrusion on the conference .
This accumulated testimony effectually stagger Mr. Monks .
His protestation have gradually become less and less vehement a they proceed in their search without make any discovery ; and , now , he give vent to several very grim laugh , and confess it could only have be his excited imagination .
He decline any renewal of the conversation , however , for that night : suddenly remember that it be past one o ’ clock .
And so the amiable couple part .
CHAPTER XXVII .
ATONES FOR THE UNPOLITENESS OF A FORMER CHAPTER ; WHICH DESERTED A LADY , MOST UNCEREMONIOUSLY As it would be , by no mean , seemly in a humble author to keep so mighty a personage a a beadle waiting , with his back to the fire , and the skirt of his coat gather up under his arm , until such time a it might suit his pleasure to relieve him ; and a it would still less become his station , or his gallantry to involve in the same neglect a lady on whom that beadle have look with an eye of tenderness and affection , and in whose ear he have whisper sweet word , which , come from such a quarter , might well thrill the bosom of maid or matron of whatsoever degree ; the historian whose pen trace these words—trusting that he know his place , and that he entertain a become reverence for those upon earth to whom high and important authority be delegated—hastens to pay them that respect which their position demand , and to treat them with all that duteous ceremony which their exalt rank , and ( by consequence ) great virtue , imperatively claim at his hand .
Towards this end , indeed , he have purpose to introduce , in this place , a dissertation touch the divine right of beadle , and elucidative of the position , that a beadle can do no wrong : which could not fail to have be both pleasurable and profitable to the right-minded reader but which he be unfortunately compel , by want of time and space , to postpone to some more convenient and fitting opportunity ; on the arrival of which , he will be prepare to show , that a beadle properly constitute : that be to say , a parochial beadle , attach to a parochial workhouse , and attend in his official capacity the parochial church : be , in right and virtue of his office , possess of all the excellence and best quality of humanity ; and that to none of those excellence , can mere company ’ beadle , or court-of-law beadle , or even chapel-of-ease beadle ( save the last , and they in a very lowly and inferior degree ) , lay the remote sustainable claim .
Mr. Bumble have re-counted the teaspoon , re-weighed the sugar-tongs , make a close inspection of the milk-pot , and ascertain to a nicety the exact condition of the furniture , down to the very horse-hair seat of the chair ; and have repeat each process full half a dozen time ; before he begin to think that it be time for Mrs. Corney to return .
Thinking begets think ; a there be no sound of Mrs. Corney ’ s approach , it occur to Mr. Bumble that it would be an innocent and virtuous way of spend the time , if he be far to allay his curiousity by a cursory glance at the interior of Mrs. Corney ’ s chest of drawer .
Having listen at the keyhole , to assure himself that nobody be approach the chamber , Mr. Bumble , begin at the bottom , proceed to make himself acquaint with the content of the three long drawer : which , be fill with various garment of good fashion and texture , carefully preserve between two layer of old newspaper , speckle with dried lavender : seem to yield him exceed satisfaction .
Arriving , in course of time , at the right-hand corner drawer ( in which be the key ) , and behold therein a small padlocked box , which , be shake , give forth a pleasant sound , a of the chinking of coin , Mr. Bumble return with a stately walk to the fireplace ; and , resume his old attitude , say , with a grave and determine air , “ I ’ ll do it ! ” He follow up this remarkable declaration , by shake his head in a waggish manner for ten minute , a though he be remonstrate with himself for be such a pleasant dog ; and then , he take a view of his leg in profile , with much seeming pleasure and interest .
He be still placidly engage in this latter survey , when Mrs. Corney , hurry into the room , throw herself , in a breathless state , on a chair by the fireside , and cover her eye with one hand , place the other over her heart , and gasp for breath .
“ Mrs .
Corney , ” say Mr. Bumble , stoop over the matron , “ what be this , ma ’ be ?
Has anything happen , ma ’ be ?
Pray answer me : I ’ m on—on— ” Mr. Bumble , in his alarm , could not immediately think of the word “ tenterhooks , ” so he say “ break bottles. ” “ Oh , Mr. Bumble ! ” cry the lady , “ I have be so dreadfully put out ! ” “ Put out , ma ’ be ! ” exclaim Mr. Bumble ; “ who have dare to— ?
I know ! ” say Mr. Bumble , check himself , with native majesty , “ this be them wicious pauper ! ” “ It ’ s dreadful to think of ! ” say the lady , shudder .
“ Then _don ’ t_ think of it , ma ’ be , ” rejoin Mr. Bumble .
“ I can ’ t help it , ” whimper the lady .
“ Then take something , ma ’ be , ” say Mr. Bumble soothingly .
“ A little of the wine ? ” “ Not for the world ! ” reply Mrs. Corney .
“ I couldn ’ t , —oh !
The top shelf in the right-hand corner—oh ! ” Uttering these word , the good lady point , distractedly , to the cupboard , and undergo a convulsion from internal spasm .
Mr. Bumble rush to the closet ; and , snatch a pint green-glass bottle from the shelf thus incoherently indicate , fill a tea-cup with it content , and hold it to the lady ’ s lip .
“ I ’ m good now , ” say Mrs. Corney , fall back , after drink half of it .
Mr. Bumble raise his eye piously to the ceiling in thankfulness ; and , bring them down again to the brim of the cup , lift it to his nose .
“ Peppermint , ” exclaim Mrs. Corney , in a faint voice , smile gently on the beadle a she speak .
“ Try it !
There ’ s a little—a little something else in it. ” Mr. Bumble taste the medicine with a doubtful look ; smack his lip ; take another taste ; and put the cup down empty .
“ It ’ s very comfort , ” say Mrs. Corney .
“ Very much so indeed , ma ’ be , ” say the beadle .
As he speak , he draw a chair beside the matron , and tenderly inquire what have happen to distress her .
“ Nothing , ” reply Mrs. Corney .
“ I be a foolish , excitable , weak creetur. ” “ Not weak , ma ’ be , ” retort Mr. Bumble , draw his chair a little closer .
“ Are you a weak creetur , Mrs. Corney ? ” “ We be all weak creeturs , ” say Mrs. Corney , lay down a general principle .
“ So we be , ” say the beadle .
Nothing be say on either side , for a minute or two afterwards .
By the expiration of that time , Mr. Bumble have illustrate the position by remove his left arm from the back of Mrs. Corney ’ s chair , where it have previously rest , to Mrs. Corney ’ s apron-string , round which it gradually become entwined .
“ We be all weak creeturs , ” say Mr. Bumble .
Mrs. Corney sigh .
“ Don ’ t sigh , Mrs. Corney , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ I can ’ t help it , ” say Mrs. Corney .
And she sigh again .
“ This be a very comfortable room , ma ’ be , ” say Mr. Bumble look round .
“ Another room , and this , ma ’ be , would be a complete thing. ” “ It would be too much for one , ” murmur the lady .
“ But not for two , ma ’ be , ” rejoin Mr. Bumble , in soft accent .
“ Eh , Mrs. Corney ? ” Mrs. Corney droop her head , when the beadle say this ; the beadle droop his , to get a view of Mrs. Corney ’ s face .
Mrs. Corney , with great propriety , turn her head away , and release her hand to get at her pocket-handkerchief ; but insensibly replace it in that of Mr. Bumble .
“ The board allow you coal , don ’ t they , Mrs. Corney ? ” inquire the beadle , affectionately press her hand .
“ And candle , ” reply Mrs. Corney , slightly return the pressure .
“ Coals , candle , and house-rent free , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ Oh , Mrs. Corney , what an Angel you be ! ” The lady be not proof against this burst of feeling .
She sink into Mr. Bumble ’ s arm ; and that gentleman in his agitation , imprint a passionate kiss upon her chaste nose .
“ Such porochial perfection ! ” exclaim Mr. Bumble , rapturously .
“ You know that Mr. Slout be bad to-night , my fascinator ? ” “ Yes , ” reply Mrs. Corney , bashfully .
“ He can ’ t live a week , the doctor say , ” pursue Mr. Bumble .
“ He be the master of this establishment ; his death will cause a wacancy ; that wacancy must be fill up .
Oh , Mrs. Corney , what a prospect this open !
What a opportunity for a jining of heart and housekeeping ! ” Mrs. Corney sob .
“ The little word ? ” say Mr. Bumble , bend over the bashful beauty .
“ The one little , little , little word , my bless Corney ? ” “ Ye—ye—yes ! ” sigh out the matron .
“ One more , ” pursue the beadle ; “ compose your darling feeling for only one more .
When be it to come off ? ” Mrs. Corney twice essay to speak : and twice fail .
At length summon up courage , she throw her arm around Mr. Bumble ’ s neck , and say , it might be as soon a ever he please , and that he be “ a irresistible duck. ” Matters be thus amicably and satisfactorily arrange , the contract be solemnly ratify in another teacupful of the peppermint mixture ; which be render the more necessary , by the flutter and agitation of the lady ’ s spirit .
While it be be dispose of , she acquaint Mr. Bumble with the old woman ’ s decease .
“ Very good , ” say that gentleman , sip his peppermint ; “ I ’ ll call at Sowerberry ’ s a I go home , and tell him to send to-morrow morning .
Was it that as frighten you , love ? ” “ It wasn ’ t anything particular , dear , ” say the lady evasively .
“ It must have be something , love , ” urge Mr. Bumble .
“ Won ’ t you tell your own B. ? ” “ Not now , ” rejoin the lady ; “ one of these day .
After we ’ re marry , dear. ” “ After we ’ re married ! ” exclaim Mr. Bumble .
“ It wasn ’ t any impudence from any of them male pauper as— ” “ No , no , love ! ” interpose the lady , hastily .
“ If I think it be , ” continue Mr. Bumble ; “ if I think a any one of ’ em have dare to lift his wulgar eye to that lovely countenance— ” “ They wouldn ’ t have dare to do it , love , ” respond the lady .
“ They have well not ! ” say Mr. Bumble , clench his fist .
“ Let me see any man , porochial or extra-porochial , a would presume to do it ; and I can tell him that he wouldn ’ t do it a second time ! ” Unembellished by any violence of gesticulation , this might have seem no very high compliment to the lady ’ s charm ; but , a Mr. Bumble accompany the threat with many warlike gesture , she be much touch with this proof of his devotion , and protest , with great admiration , that he be indeed a dove .
The dove then turn up his coat-collar , and put on his cocked hat ; and , have exchange a long and affectionate embrace with his future partner , once again brave the cold wind of the night : merely pausing , for a few minute , in the male pauper ’ ward , to abuse them a little , with the view of satisfy himself that he could fill the office of workhouse-master with needful acerbity .
Assured of his qualification , Mr. Bumble leave the building with a light heart , and bright vision of his future promotion : which serve to occupy his mind until he reach the shop of the undertaker .
Now , Mr. and Mrs. Sowerberry have go out to tea and supper : and Noah Claypole not be at any time dispose to take upon himself a great amount of physical exertion than be necessary to a convenient performance of the two function of eating and drinking , the shop be not close , although it be past the usual hour of shutting-up .
Mr. Bumble tap with his cane on the counter several time ; but , attract no attention , and behold a light shin through the glass-window of the little parlour at the back of the shop , he make bold to peep in and see what be go forward ; and when he saw what be go forward , he be not a little surprised .
The cloth be lay for supper ; the table be cover with bread and butter , plate and glass ; a porter-pot and a wine-bottle .
At the upper end of the table , Mr. Noah Claypole loll negligently in an easy-chair , with his leg throw over one of the arm : an open clasp-knife in one hand , and a mass of butter bread in the other .
Close beside him stand Charlotte , open oyster from a barrel : which Mr. Claypole condescend to swallow , with remarkable avidity .
A more than ordinary redness in the region of the young gentleman ’ s nose , and a kind of fixed wink in his right eye , denote that he be in a slight degree intoxicate ; these symptom be confirm by the intense relish with which he take his oyster , for which nothing but a strong appreciation of their cooling property , in case of internal fever , could have sufficiently account .
“ Here ’ s a delicious fat one , Noah , dear ! ” say Charlotte ; “ try him , do ; only this one. ” “ What a delicious thing be a oyster ! ” remark Mr. Claypole , after he have swallow it .
“ What a pity it be , a number of ’ em should ever make you feel uncomfortable ; isn ’ t it , Charlotte ? ” “ It ’ s quite a cruelty , ” say Charlotte .
“ So it be , ” acquiesce Mr. Claypole .
“ An ’ t yer fond of oyster ? ” “ Not overmuch , ” reply Charlotte .
“ I like to see you eat ’ em , Noah dear , good than eat ’ em myself. ” “ Lor ! ” say Noah , reflectively ; “ how queer ! ” “ Have another , ” say Charlotte .
“ Here ’ s one with such a beautiful , delicate beard ! ” “ I can ’ t manage any more , ” say Noah .
“ I ’ m very sorry .
Come here , Charlotte , and I ’ ll kiss yer. ” “ What ! ” say Mr. Bumble , burst into the room .
“ Say that again , sir. ” Charlotte utter a scream , and hide her face in her apron .
Mr. Claypole , without make any further change in his position than suffer his leg to reach the ground , gaze at the beadle in drunken terror .
“ Say it again , you wile , owdacious fellow ! ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ How dare you mention such a thing , sir ?
And how dare you encourage him , you insolent minx ?
Kiss her ! ” exclaim Mr. Bumble , in strong indignation .
“ Faugh ! ” “ I didn ’ t mean to do it ! ” say Noah , blubbering .
“ She ’ s always a-kissing of me , whether I like it , or not. ” “ Oh , Noah , ” cry Charlotte , reproachfully .
“ Yer be ; yer know yer be ! ” retort Noah .
“ She ’ s always a-doin ’ of it , Mr. Bumble , sir ; she chuck me under the chin , please , sir ; and make all manner of love ! ” “ Silence ! ” cry Mr. Bumble , sternly .
“ Take yourself downstairs , ma ’ be .
Noah , you shut up the shop ; say another word till your master come home , at your peril ; and , when he do come home , tell him that Mr. Bumble say he be to send a old woman ’ s shell after breakfast to-morrow morning .
Do you hear sir ?
Kissing ! ” cry Mr. Bumble , hold up his hand .
“ The sin and wickedness of the low order in this porochial district be frightful !
If Parliament don ’ t take their abominable course under consideration , this country ’ s ruin , and the character of the peasantry go for ever ! ” With these word , the beadle strode , with a lofty and gloomy air , from the undertaker ’ s premise .
And now that we have accompany him so far on his road home , and have make all necessary preparation for the old woman ’ s funeral , let u set on foot a few inquires after young Oliver Twist , and ascertain whether he be still lie in the ditch where Toby Crackit leave him .
CHAPTER XXVIII .
LOOKS AFTER OLIVER , AND PROCEEDS WITH HIS ADVENTURES “ Wolves tear your throat ! ” mutter Sikes , grind his teeth .
“ I wish I be among some of you ; you ’ d howl the hoarser for it. ” As Sikes growl forth this imprecation , with the most desperate ferocity that his desperate nature be capable of , he rest the body of the wounded boy across his bended knee ; and turn his head , for an instant , to look back at his pursuer .
There be little to be make out , in the mist and darkness ; but the loud shouting of men vibrate through the air , and the barking of the neighbouring dog , rouse by the sound of the alarm bell , resound in every direction .
“ Stop , you white-livered hound ! ” cry the robber , shout after Toby Crackit , who , make the best use of his long leg , be already ahead .
“ Stop ! ” The repetition of the word , bring Toby to a dead stand-still .
For he be not quite satisfy that he be beyond the range of pistol-shot ; and Sikes be in no mood to be play with .
“ Bear a hand with the boy , ” cry Sikes , beckon furiously to his confederate .
“ Come back ! ” Toby make a show of return ; but venture , in a low voice , break for want of breath , to intimate considerable reluctance a he come slowly along .
“ Quicker ! ” cry Sikes , lay the boy in a dry ditch at his foot , and draw a pistol from his pocket .
“ Don ’ t play booty with me. ” At this moment the noise grow louder .
Sikes , again look round , could discern that the men who have give chase be already climb the gate of the field in which he stand ; and that a couple of dog be some pace in advance of them .
“ It ’ s all up , Bill ! ” cry Toby ; “ drop the kid , and show ’ em your heels. ” With this parting advice , Mr. Crackit , prefer the chance of be shoot by his friend , to the certainty of be take by his enemy , fairly turn tail , and dart off at full speed .
Sikes clench his teeth ; take one look around ; throw over the prostrate form of Oliver , the cape in which he have be hurriedly muffle ; ran along the front of the hedge , a if to distract the attention of those behind , from the spot where the boy lay ; pause , for a second , before another hedge which meet it at right angle ; and whirl his pistol high into the air , clear it at a bound , and be go .
“ Ho , ho , there ! ” cry a tremulous voice in the rear .
“ Pincher !
Neptune !
Come here , come here ! ” The dog , who , in common with their master , seem to have no particular relish for the sport in which they be engage , readily answer to the command .
Three men , who have by this time advance some distance into the field , stop to take counsel together .
“ My advice , or , leastways , I should say , my _orders_ , be , ” say the fat man of the party , “ that we ’ mediately go home again. ” “ I be agreeable to anything which be agreeable to Mr. Giles , ” say a shorter man ; who be by no mean of a slim figure , and who be very pale in the face , and very polite : a frighten men frequently be .
“ I shouldn ’ t wish to appear ill-mannered , gentleman , ” say the third , who have call the dog back , “ Mr .
Giles ought to know. ” “ Certainly , ” reply the shorter man ; “ and whatever Mr. Giles say , it isn ’ t our place to contradict him .
No , no , I know my sitiwation !
Thank my star , I know my sitiwation. ” To tell the truth , the little man _did_ seem to know his situation , and to know perfectly well that it be by no mean a desirable one ; for his teeth chatter in his head a he speak .
“ You be afraid , Brittles , ” say Mr. Giles .
“ I an ’ t , ” say Brittles .
“ You be , ” say Giles .
“ You ’ re a falsehood , Mr. Giles , ” say Brittles .
“ You ’ re a lie , Brittles , ” say Mr. Giles .
Now , these four retort arose from Mr. Giles ’ s taunt ; and Mr. Giles ’ s taunt have arise from his indignation at have the responsibility of go home again , impose upon himself under cover of a compliment .
The third man bring the dispute to a close , most philosophically .
“ I ’ ll tell you what it be , gentleman , ” say he , “ we ’ re all afraid. ” “ Speak for yourself , sir , ” say Mr. Giles , who be the pale of the party .
“ So I do , ” reply the man .
“ It ’ s natural and proper to be afraid , under such circumstance .
I am. ” “ So be I , ” say Brittles ; “ only there ’ s no call to tell a man he be , so bounceably. ” These frank admission soften Mr. Giles , who at once own that _he_ be afraid ; upon which , they all three face about , and run back again with the complete unanimity , until Mr. Giles ( who have the short wind of the party , a be encumber with a pitchfork ) most handsomely insist on stopping , to make an apology for his hastiness of speech .
“ But it ’ s wonderful , ” say Mr. Giles , when he have explain , “ what a man will do , when his blood be up .
I should have commit murder—I know I should—if we ’ d catch one of them rascals. ” As the other two be impress with a similar presentiment ; and a their blood , like his , have all go down again ; some speculation ensue upon the cause of this sudden change in their temperament .
“ I know what it be , ” say Mr. Giles ; “ it be the gate. ” “ I shouldn ’ t wonder if it be , ” exclaim Brittles , catch at the idea .
“ You may depend upon it , ” say Giles , “ that that gate stop the flow of the excitement .
I felt all mine suddenly go away , a I be climb over it. ” By a remarkable coincidence , the other two have be visit with the same unpleasant sensation at that precise moment .
It be quite obvious , therefore , that it be the gate ; especially a there be no doubt regard the time at which the change have take place , because all three remember that they have come in sight of the robber at the instant of it occurance .
This dialogue be hold between the two men who have surprise the burglar , and a travelling tinker who have be sleep in an outhouse , and who have be rouse , together with his two mongrel cur , to join in the pursuit .
Mr. Giles act in the double capacity of butler and steward to the old lady of the mansion ; Brittles be a lad of all-work : who , have enter her service a mere child , be treat a a promising young boy still , though he be something past thirty .
Encouraging each other with such converse a this ; but , keep very close together , notwithstanding , and look apprehensively round , whenever a fresh gust rattle through the bough ; the three men hurry back to a tree , behind which they have leave their lantern , l it light should inform the thief in what direction to fire .
Catching up the light , they make the best of their way home , at a good round trot ; and long after their dusky form have cease to be discernible , the light might have be see twinkle and dance in the distance , like some exhalation of the damp and gloomy atmosphere through which it be swiftly borne .
The air grow colder , a day come slowly on ; and the mist roll along the ground like a dense cloud of smoke .
The grass be wet ; the pathway , and low place , be all mire and water ; the damp breath of an unwholesome wind go languidly by , with a hollow moaning .
Still , Oliver lay motionless and insensible on the spot where Sikes have leave him .
Morning drew on apace .
The air become more sharp and piercing , a it first dull hue—the death of night , rather than the birth of day—glimmered faintly in the sky .
The object which have look dim and terrible in the darkness , grow more and more defined , and gradually resolve into their familiar shape .
The rain come down , thick and fast , and patter noisily among the leafless bush .
But , Oliver felt it not , a it beat against him ; for he still lay stretch , helpless and unconscious , on his bed of clay .
At length , a low cry of pain break the stillness that prevail ; and utter it , the boy awoke .
His left arm , rudely bandage in a shawl , hung heavy and useless at his side ; the bandage be saturate with blood .
He be so weak , that he could scarcely raise himself into a sitting posture ; when he have do so , he look feebly round for help , and groan with pain .
Trembling in every joint , from cold and exhaustion , he make an effort to stand upright ; but , shudder from head to foot , fell prostrate on the ground .
After a short return of the stupor in which he have be so long plunged , Oliver : urge by a creeping sickness at his heart , which seem to warn him that if he lay there , he must surely die : get upon his foot , and essay to walk .
His head be dizzy , and he stagger to and fro like a drunken man .
But he keep up , nevertheless , and , with his head droop languidly on his breast , go stumble onward , he know not whither .
And now , host of bewildering and confused idea come crowd on his mind .
He seem to be still walk between Sikes and Crackit , who be angrily disputing—for the very word they say , sound in his ear ; and when he catch his own attention , a it be , by make some violent effort to save himself from fall , he find that he be talk to them .
Then , he be alone with Sikes , plod on a on the previous day ; and a shadowy people pass them , he felt the robber ’ s grasp upon his wrist .
Suddenly , he start back at the report of firearm ; there rise into the air , loud cry and shout ; light gleam before his eye ; all be noise and tumult , a some unseen hand bore him hurriedly away .
Through all these rapid vision , there run an undefined , uneasy consciousness of pain , which weary and torment him incessantly .
Thus he stagger on , creep , almost mechanically , between the bar of gate , or through hedge-gaps a they come in his way , until he reach a road .
Here the rain begin to fall so heavily , that it rouse him .
He look about , and saw that at no great distance there be a house , which perhaps he could reach .
Pitying his condition , they might have compassion on him ; and if they do not , it would be well , he think , to die near human being , than in the lonely open field .
He summon up all his strength for one last trial , and bend his falter step towards it .
As he draw nearer to this house , a feeling come over him that he have see it before .
He remember nothing of it detail ; but the shape and aspect of the building seem familiar to him .
That garden wall !
On the grass inside , he have fall on his knee last night , and pray the two men ’ s mercy .
It be the very house they have attempt to rob .
Oliver felt such fear come over him when he recognise the place , that , for the instant , he forget the agony of his wound , and think only of flight .
Flight !
He could scarcely stand : and if he be in full possession of all the best power of his slight and youthful frame , whither could he fly ?
He push against the garden-gate ; it be unlocked , and swung open on it hinge .
He totter across the lawn ; climb the step ; knock faintly at the door ; and , his whole strength fail him , sink down against one of the pillar of the little portico .
It happen that about this time , Mr. Giles , Brittles , and the tinker , be recruit themselves , after the fatigue and terror of the night , with tea and sundries , in the kitchen .
Not that it be Mr. Giles ’ s habit to admit to too great familiarity the humbler servant : towards whom it be rather his wont to deport himself with a lofty affability , which , while it gratify , could not fail to remind them of his superior position in society .
But , death , fire , and burglary , make all men equal ; so Mr. Giles sit with his leg stretch out before the kitchen fender , lean his left arm on the table , while , with his right , he illustrate a circumstantial and minute account of the robbery , to which his bearer ( but especially the cook and housemaid , who be of the party ) listen with breathless interest .
“ It be about half-past two , ” say Mr. Giles , “ or I wouldn ’ t swear that it mightn ’ t have be a little nearer three , when I wake up , and , turn round in my bed , a it might be so , ( here Mr. Giles turn round in his chair , and pull the corner of the table-cloth over him to imitate bed-clothes , ) I fancy I heerd a noise. ” At this point of the narrative the cook turn pale , and ask the housemaid to shut the door : who ask Brittles , who ask the tinker , who pretend not to hear .
“ —Heerd a noise , ” continue Mr. Giles .
“ I say , at first , ‘ This be illusion ’ ; and be compose myself off to sleep , when I heerd the noise again , distinct. ” “ What sort of a noise ? ” ask the cook .
“ A kind of a busting noise , ” reply Mr. Giles , look round him .
“ More like the noise of powder a iron bar on a nutmeg-grater , ” suggest Brittles .
“ It be , when _you_ heerd it , sir , ” rejoin Mr. Giles ; “ but , at this time , it have a busting sound .
I turn down the clothes ” ; continue Giles , roll back the table-cloth , “ sit up in bed ; and listened. ” The cook and housemaid simultaneously ejaculate “ Lor ! ” and draw their chair closer together .
“ I heerd it now , quite apparent , ” resume Mr. Giles .
“ ‘ Somebody , ’ I say , ‘ be force of a door , or window ; what ’ s to be do ?
I ’ ll call up that poor lad , Brittles , and save him from be murder in his bed ; or his throat , ’ I say , ‘ may be cut from his right ear to his left , without his ever know it. ’ ” Here , all eye be turn upon Brittles , who fix his upon the speaker , and star at him , with his mouth wide open , and his face expressive of the most unmitigated horror .
“ I toss off the clothes , ” say Giles , throw away the table-cloth , and look very hard at the cook and housemaid , “ get softly out of bed ; draw on a pair of— ” “ Ladies present , Mr. Giles , ” murmur the tinker .
“ —Of _shoes_ , sir , ” say Giles , turn upon him , and lay great emphasis on the word ; “ seize the loaded pistol that always go upstairs with the plate-basket ; and walk on tiptoe to his room .
‘ Brittles , ’ I say , when I have woke him , ‘ don ’ t be frighten ! ’ ” “ So you do , ” observed Brittles , in a low voice .
“ ‘ We ’ re dead men , I think , Brittles , ’ I say , ” continue Giles ; “ ‘ but don ’ t be frightened. ’ ” “ _Was_ he frighten ? ” ask the cook .
“ Not a bit of it , ” reply Mr. Giles .
“ He be a firm—ah !
pretty near as firm a I was. ” “ I should have die at once , I ’ m sure , if it have be me , ” observe the housemaid .
“ You ’ re a woman , ” retort Brittles , pluck up a little .
“ Brittles be right , ” say Mr. Giles , nod his head , approvingly ; “ from a woman , nothing else be to be expect .
We , be men , take a dark lantern that be stand on Brittle ’ s hob , and grope our way downstairs in the pitch dark , —as it might be so. ” Mr. Giles have rise from his seat , and take two step with his eye shut , to accompany his description with appropriate action , when he start violently , in common with the rest of the company , and hurry back to his chair .
The cook and housemaid screamed .
“ It be a knock , ” say Mr. Giles , assume perfect serenity .
“ Open the door , somebody. ” Nobody move .
“ It seem a strange sort of a thing , a knock come at such a time in the morning , ” say Mr. Giles , survey the pale face which surround him , and look very blank himself ; “ but the door must be open .
Do you hear , somebody ? ” Mr. Giles , a he speak , look at Brittles ; but that young man , be naturally modest , probably consider himself nobody , and so hold that the inquiry could not have any application to him ; at all event , he tender no reply .
Mr. Giles direct an appealing glance at the tinker ; but he have suddenly fall asleep .
The woman be out of the question .
“ If Brittles would rather open the door , in the presence of witness , ” say Mr. Giles , after a short silence , “ I be ready to make one. ” “ So be I , ” say the tinker , wake up , as suddenly a he have fall asleep .
Brittles capitulate on these term ; and the party be somewhat re-assured by the discovery ( make on throw open the shutter ) that it be now broad day , take their way upstairs ; with the dog in front .
The two woman , who be afraid to stay below , bring up the rear .
By the advice of Mr. Giles , they all talk very loud , to warn any evil-disposed person outside , that they be strong in number ; and by a master-stoke of policy , originate in the brain of the same ingenious gentleman , the dog ’ tail be well pinch , in the hall , to make them bark savagely .
These precaution have be take , Mr. Giles hold on fast by the tinker ’ s arm ( to prevent his run away , a he pleasantly say ) , and give the word of command to open the door .
Brittles obey ; the group , peep timorously over each other ’ s shoulder , behold no more formidable object than poor little Oliver Twist , speechless and exhaust , who raise his heavy eye , and mutely solicit their compassion .
“ A boy ! ” exclaim Mr. Giles , valiantly , push the tinker into the background .
“ What ’ s the matter with the—eh ? —Why—Brittles—look here—don ’ t you know ? ” Brittles , who have get behind the door to open it , no sooner saw Oliver , than he utter a loud cry .
Mr. Giles , seize the boy by one leg and one arm ( fortunately not the broken limb ) lug him straight into the hall , and deposit him at full length on the floor thereof .
“ Here he be ! ” bawl Giles , call in a state of great excitement , up the staircase ; “ here ’ s one of the thief , ma ’ be !
Here ’ s a thief , miss !
Wounded , miss !
I shoot him , miss ; and Brittles hold the light. ” “ —In a lantern , miss , ” cry Brittles , apply one hand to the side of his mouth , so that his voice might travel the good .
The two women-servants run upstairs to carry the intelligence that Mr. Giles have capture a robber ; and the tinker busy himself in endeavour to restore Oliver , lest he should die before he could be hang .
In the midst of all this noise and commotion , there be heard a sweet female voice , which quell it in an instant .
“ Giles ! ” whisper the voice from the stair-head .
“ I ’ m here , miss , ” reply Mr. Giles .
“ Don ’ t be frighten , miss ; I ain ’ t much injure .
He didn ’ t make a very desperate resistance , miss !
I be soon too many for him. ” “ Hush ! ” reply the young lady ; “ you frighten my aunt as much a the thief do .
Is the poor creature much hurt ? ” “ Wounded desperate , miss , ” reply Giles , with indescribable complacency .
“ He look a if he be a-going , miss , ” bawl Brittles , in the same manner a before .
“ Wouldn ’ t you like to come and look at him , miss , in case he should ? ” “ Hush , pray ; there ’ s a good man ! ” rejoin the lady .
“ Wait quietly only one instant , while I speak to aunt. ” With a footstep a soft and gentle a the voice , the speaker trip away .
She soon return , with the direction that the wounded person be to be carry , carefully , upstairs to Mr. Giles ’ s room ; and that Brittles be to saddle the pony and betake himself instantly to Chertsey : from which place , he be to despatch , with all speed , a constable and doctor .
“ But win ’ t you take one look at him , first , miss ? ” ask Mr. Giles , with as much pride a if Oliver be some bird of rare plumage , that he have skilfully bring down .
“ Not one little peep , miss ? ” “ Not now , for the world , ” reply the young lady .
“ Poor fellow !
Oh !
treat him kindly , Giles for my sake ! ” The old servant look up at the speaker , a she turn away , with a glance a proud and admiring a if she have be his own child .
Then , bend over Oliver , he help to carry him upstairs , with the care and solicitude of a woman .
CHAPTER XXIX .
HAS AN INTRODUCTORY ACCOUNT OF THE INMATES OF THE HOUSE , TO WHICH OLIVER RESORTED In a handsome room : though it furniture have rather the air of old-fashioned comfort , than of modern elegance : there sit two lady at a well-spread breakfast-table .
Mr. Giles , dress with scrupulous care in a full suit of black , be in attendance upon them .
He have take his station some half-way between the side-board and the breakfast-table ; and , with his body draw up to it full height , his head throw back , and incline the mere trifle on one side , his left leg advance , and his right hand thrust into his waist-coat , while his left hang down by his side , grasp a waiter , look like one who labour under a very agreeable sense of his own merit and importance .
Of the two lady , one be well advance in year ; but the high-backed oaken chair in which she sit , be not more upright than she .
Dressed with the utmost nicety and precision , in a quaint mixture of by-gone costume , with some slight concession to the prevailing taste , which rather serve to point the old style pleasantly than to impair it effect , she sit , in a stately manner , with her hand fold on the table before her .
Her eye ( and age have dim but little of their brightness ) be attentively upon her young companion .
The young lady be in the lovely bloom and spring-time of womanhood ; at that age , when , if ever angel be for God ’ s good purpose enthrone in mortal form , they may be , without impiety , suppose to abide in such a hers .
She be not past seventeen .
Cast in so slight and exquisite a mould ; so mild and gentle ; so pure and beautiful ; that earth seem not her element , nor it rough creatures her fit companion .
The very intelligence that shone in her deep blue eye , and be stamp upon her noble head , seem scarcely of her age , or of the world ; and yet the change expression of sweetness and good humour , the thousand light that play about the face , and leave no shadow there ; above all , the smile , the cheerful , happy smile , be make for Home , and fireside peace and happiness .
She be busily engage in the little office of the table .
Chancing to raise her eye a the elder lady be regard her , she playfully put back her hair , which be simply braid on her forehead ; and throw into her beaming look , such an expression of affection and artless loveliness , that bless spirit might have smile to look upon her .
“ And Brittles have be go upwards of an hour , have he ? ” ask the old lady , after a pause .
“ An hour and twelve minute , ma ’ be , ” reply Mr. Giles , refer to a silver watch , which he draw forth by a black ribbon .
“ He be always slow , ” remark the old lady .
“ Brittles always be a slow boy , ma ’ be , ” reply the attendant .
And see , by the bye , that Brittles have be a slow boy for upwards of thirty year , there appear no great probability of his ever be a fast one .
“ He get bad instead of good , I think , ” say the elder lady .
“ It be very inexcusable in him if he stop to play with any other boy , ” say the young lady , smile .
Mr. Giles be apparently consider the propriety of indulge in a respectful smile himself , when a gig drive up to the garden-gate : out of which there jump a fat gentleman , who run straight up to the door : and who , get quickly into the house by some mysterious process , burst into the room , and nearly overturn Mr. Giles and the breakfast-table together .
“ I never heard of such a thing ! ” exclaim the fat gentleman .
“ My dear Mrs. Maylie—bless my soul—in the silence of the night , too—I _never_ heard of such a thing ! ” With these expression of condolence , the fat gentleman shake hand with both lady , and draw up a chair , inquire how they find themselves .
“ You ought to be dead ; positively dead with the fright , ” say the fat gentleman .
“ Why didn ’ t you send ?
Bless me , my man should have come in a minute ; and so would I ; and my assistant would have be delight ; or anybody , I ’ m sure , under such circumstance .
Dear , dear !
So unexpected !
In the silence of the night , too ! ” The doctor seem especially trouble by the fact of the robbery have be unexpected , and attempt in the night-time ; a if it be the establish custom of gentleman in the housebreak way to transact business at noon , and to make an appointment , by post , a day or two previous .
“ And you , Miss Rose , ” say the doctor , turn to the young lady , “ I— ” “ Oh !
very much so , indeed , ” say Rose , interrupt him ; “ but there be a poor creature upstairs , whom aunt wish you to see. ” “ Ah !
to be sure , ” reply the doctor , “ so there be .
That be your handiwork , Giles , I understand. ” Mr. Giles , who have be feverishly put the tea-cups to right , blush very red , and say that he have have that honour .
“ Honour , eh ? ” say the doctor ; “ well , I don ’ t know ; perhaps it ’ s a honourable to hit a thief in a back kitchen , a to hit your man at twelve pace .
Fancy that he fire in the air , and you ’ ve fight a duel , Giles. ” Mr. Giles , who think this light treatment of the matter an unjust attempt at diminish his glory , answer respectfully , that it be not for the like of him to judge about that ; but he rather think it be no joke to the opposite party .
“ Gad , that ’ s true ! ” say the doctor .
“ Where be he ?
Show me the way .
I ’ ll look in again , a I come down , Mrs. Maylie .
That ’ s the little window that he get in at , eh ?
Well , I couldn ’ t have believe it ! ” Talking all the way , he follow Mr. Giles upstairs ; and while he be go upstairs , the reader may be inform , that Mr. Losberne , a surgeon in the neighbourhood , know through a circuit of ten mile round a “ the doctor , ” have grow fat , more from good-humour than from good living : and be a kind and hearty , and withal a eccentric an old bachelor , a will be find in five time that space , by any explorer alive .
The doctor be absent , much long than either he or the lady have anticipate .
A large flat box be fetch out of the gig ; and a bedroom bell be rung very often ; and the servant run up and down stair perpetually ; from which tokens it be justly conclude that something important be go on above .
At length he return ; and in reply to an anxious inquiry after his patient ; look very mysterious , and close the door , carefully .
“ This be a very extraordinary thing , Mrs. Maylie , ” say the doctor , stand with his back to the door , a if to keep it shut .
“ He be not in danger , I hope ? ” say the old lady .
“ Why , that would _not_ be an extraordinary thing , under the circumstance , ” reply the doctor ; “ though I don ’ t think he be .
Have you see the thief ? ” “ No , ” rejoin the old lady .
“ Nor heard anything about him ? ” “ No. ” “ I beg your pardon , ma ’ be , interposed Mr. Giles ; “ but I be go to tell you about him when Doctor Losberne come in. ” The fact be , that Mr. Giles have not , at first , be able to bring his mind to the avowal , that he have only shoot a boy .
Such commendation have be bestow upon his bravery , that he could not , for the life of him , help postpone the explanation for a few delicious minute ; during which he have flourish , in the very zenith of a brief reputation for undaunted courage .
“ Rose wish to see the man , ” say Mrs. Maylie , “ but I wouldn ’ t hear of it. ” “ Humph ! ” rejoin the doctor .
“ There be nothing very alarm in his appearance .
Have you any objection to see him in my presence ? ” “ If it be necessary , ” reply the old lady , “ certainly not. ” “ Then I think it be necessary , ” say the doctor ; “ at all event , I be quite sure that you would deeply regret not have do so , if you postpone it .
He be perfectly quiet and comfortable now .
Allow me—Miss Rose , will you permit me ?
Not the slight fear , I pledge you my honour ! ” CHAPTER XXX .
RELATES WHAT OLIVER ’ S NEW VISITORS THOUGHT OF HIM With many loquacious assurance that they would be agreeably surprise in the aspect of the criminal , the doctor draw the young lady ’ s arm through one of his ; and offer his disengaged hand to Mrs. Maylie , lead them , with much ceremony and stateliness , upstairs .
“ Now , ” say the doctor , in a whisper , a he softly turn the handle of a bedroom-door , “ let u hear what you think of him .
He have not be shave very recently , but he don ’ t look at all ferocious notwithstanding .
Stop , though !
Let me first see that he be in visit order. ” Stepping before them , he look into the room .
Motioning them to advance , he close the door when they have enter ; and gently draw back the curtain of the bed .
Upon it , in lieu of the dog , black-visaged ruffian they have expect to behold , there lay a mere child : worn with pain and exhaustion , and sunk into a deep sleep .
His wounded arm , bound and splinter up , be cross upon his breast ; his head recline upon the other arm , which be half hide by his long hair , a it stream over the pillow .
The honest gentleman hold the curtain in his hand , and look on , for a minute or so , in silence .
Whilst he be watch the patient thus , the young lady glide softly past , and seat herself in a chair by the bedside , gather Oliver ’ s hair from his face .
As she stoop over him , her tear fell upon his forehead .
The boy stir , and smile in his sleep , a though these mark of pity and compassion have awaken some pleasant dream of a love and affection he have never know .
Thus , a strain of gentle music , or the rippling of water in a silent place , or the odour of a flower , or the mention of a familiar word , will sometimes call up sudden dim remembrance of scene that never be , in this life ; which vanish like a breath ; which some brief memory of a happy existence , long go by , would seem to have awaken ; which no voluntary exertion of the mind can ever recall .
“ What can this mean ? ” exclaim the elder lady .
“ This poor child can never have be the pupil of robber ! ” “ Vice , ” say the surgeon , replace the curtain , “ take up her abode in many temple ; and who can say that a fair outside shell not enshrine her ? ” “ But at so early an age ! ” urge Rose .
“ My dear young lady , ” rejoin the surgeon , mournfully shake his head ; “ crime , like death , be not confine to the old and wither alone .
The young and fair be too often it chosen victims. ” “ But , can you—oh !
can you really believe that this delicate boy have be the voluntary associate of the bad outcast of society ? ” say Rose .
The surgeon shake his head , in a manner which intimate that he fear it be very possible ; and observe that they might disturb the patient , lead the way into an adjoining apartment .
“ But even if he have be wicked , ” pursue Rose , “ think how young he be ; think that he may never have know a mother ’ s love , or the comfort of a home ; that ill-usage and blow , or the want of bread , may have drive him to herd with men who have force him to guilt .
Aunt , dear aunt , for mercy ’ s sake , think of this , before you let them drag this sick child to a prison , which in any case must be the grave of all his chance of amendment .
Oh !
a you love me , and know that I have never felt the want of parent in your goodness and affection , but that I might have do so , and might have be equally helpless and unprotected with this poor child , have pity upon him before it be too late ! ” “ My dear love , ” say the elder lady , a she fold the weep girl to her bosom , “ do you think I would harm a hair of his head ? ” “ Oh , no ! ” reply Rose , eagerly .
“ No , surely , ” say the old lady ; “ my day be draw to their close : and may mercy be show to me a I show it to others !
What can I do to save him , sir ? ” “ Let me think , ma ’ be , ” say the doctor ; “ let me think. ” Mr. Losberne thrust his hand into his pocket , and take several turn up and down the room ; often stopping , and balance himself on his toe , and frown frightfully .
After various exclamation of “ I ’ ve get it now ” and “ no , I haven ’ t , ” and a many renewal of the walking and frowning , he at length make a dead halt , and speak a follow : “ I think if you give me a full and unlimited commission to bully Giles , and that little boy , Brittles , I can manage it .
Giles be a faithful fellow and an old servant , I know ; but you can make it up to him in a thousand way , and reward him for be such a good shot besides .
You don ’ t object to that ? ” “ Unless there be some other way of preserve the child , ” reply Mrs. Maylie .
“ There be no other , ” say the doctor .
“ No other , take my word for it. ” “ Then my aunt invest you with full power , ” say Rose , smile through her tear ; “ but pray don ’ t be harder upon the poor fellow than be indispensably necessary. ” “ You seem to think , ” retort the doctor , “ that everybody be dispose to be hard-hearted to-day , except yourself , Miss Rose .
I only hope , for the sake of the rise male sex generally , that you may be find in a vulnerable and soft-hearted a mood by the first eligible young fellow who appeal to your compassion ; and I wish I be a young fellow , that I might avail myself , on the spot , of such a favourable opportunity for do so , a the present. ” “ You be a great a boy a poor Brittles himself , ” return Rose , blush .
“ Well , ” say the doctor , laugh heartily , “ that be no very difficult matter .
But to return to this boy .
The great point of our agreement be yet to come .
He will wake in an hour or so , I dare say ; and although I have tell that thick-headed constable-fellow downstairs that he musn ’ t be move or speak to , on peril of his life , I think we may converse with him without danger .
Now I make this stipulation—that I shall examine him in your presence , and that , if , from what he say , we judge , and I can show to the satisfaction of your cool reason , that he be a real and thorough bad one ( which be more than possible ) , he shall be leave to his fate , without any farther interference on my part , at all events. ” “ Oh no , aunt ! ” entreat Rose .
“ Oh yes , aunt ! ” say the doctor .
“ Is be a bargain ? ” “ He can not be harden in vice , ” say Rose ; “ It be impossible. ” “ Very good , ” retort the doctor ; “ then so much the more reason for accede to my proposition. ” Finally the treaty be enter into ; and the party thereunto sit down to wait , with some impatience , until Oliver should awake .
The patience of the two lady be destine to undergo a longer trial than Mr. Losberne have lead them to expect ; for hour after hour pass on , and still Oliver slumber heavily .
It be even , indeed , before the kind-hearted doctor bring them the intelligence , that he be at length sufficiently restore to be speak to .
The boy be very ill , he say , and weak from the loss of blood ; but his mind be so troubled with anxiety to disclose something , that he deem it good to give him the opportunity , than to insist upon his remain quiet until next morning : which he should otherwise have do .
The conference be a long one .
Oliver tell them all his simple history , and be often compel to stop , by pain and want of strength .
It be a solemn thing , to hear , in the darkened room , the feeble voice of the sick child recount a weary catalogue of evil and calamity which hard men have bring upon him .
Oh !
if when we oppress and grind our fellow-creatures , we bestow but one thought on the dark evidence of human error , which , like dense and heavy cloud , be rise , slowly it be true , but not less surely , to Heaven , to pour their after-vengeance on our head ; if we hear but one instant , in imagination , the deep testimony of dead men ’ s voice , which no power can stifle , and no pride shut out ; where would be the injury and injustice , the suffering , misery , cruelty , and wrong , that each day ’ s life bring with it !
Oliver ’ s pillow be smooth by gentle hand that night ; and loveliness and virtue watch him a he sleep .
He felt calm and happy , and could have die without a murmur .
The momentous interview be no sooner conclude , and Oliver compose to rest again , than the doctor , after wipe his eye , and condemn them for be weak all at once , betook himself downstairs to open upon Mr. Giles .
And find nobody about the parlour , it occur to him , that he could perhaps originate the proceeding with good effect in the kitchen ; so into the kitchen he go .
There be assemble , in that low house of the domestic parliament , the women-servants , Mr. Brittles , Mr. Giles , the tinker ( who have receive a special invitation to regale himself for the remainder of the day , in consideration of his service ) , and the constable .
The latter gentleman have a large staff , a large head , large feature , and large half-boots ; and he look a if he have be take a proportionate allowance of ale—as indeed he have .
The adventure of the previous night be still under discussion ; for Mr. Giles be expatiate upon his presence of mind , when the doctor enter ; Mr. Brittles , with a mug of ale in his hand , be corroborate everything , before his superior say it .
“ Sit still ! ” say the doctor , wave his hand .
“ Thank you , sir , ” say Mr. Giles .
“ Misses wish some ale to be give out , sir ; and a I felt no way incline for my own little room , sir , and be dispose for company , I be take mine among ’ em here. ” Brittles head a low murmur , by which the lady and gentleman generally be understand to express the gratification they derive from Mr. Giles ’ s condescension .
Mr. Giles look round with a patronise air , as much a to say that so long a they behave properly , he would never desert them .
“ How be the patient to-night , sir ? ” ask Giles .
“ So-so ” ; return the doctor .
“ I be afraid you have get yourself into a scrape there , Mr. Giles. ” “ I hope you don ’ t mean to say , sir , ” say Mr. Giles , tremble , “ that he ’ s go to die .
If I think it , I should never be happy again .
I wouldn ’ t cut a boy off : no , not even Brittles here ; not for all the plate in the county , sir. ” “ That ’ s not the point , ” say the doctor , mysteriously .
“ Mr .
Giles , be you a Protestant ? ” “ Yes , sir , I hope so , ” falter Mr. Giles , who have turn very pale .
“ And what be _you_ , boy ? ” say the doctor , turn sharply upon Brittles .
“ Lord bless me , sir ! ” reply Brittles , start violently ; “ I ’ m the same a Mr. Giles , sir. ” “ Then tell me this , ” say the doctor , “ both of you , both of you !
Are you go to take upon yourselves to swear , that that boy upstairs be the boy that be put through the little window last night ?
Out with it !
Come !
We be prepared for you ! ” The doctor , who be universally consider one of the best-tempered creature on earth , make this demand in such a dreadful tone of anger , that Giles and Brittles , who be considerably muddle by ale and excitement , star at each other in a state of stupefaction .
“ Pay attention to the reply , constable , will you ? ” say the doctor , shake his forefinger with great solemnity of manner , and tap the bridge of his nose with it , to bespeak the exercise of that worthy ’ s utmost acuteness .
“ Something may come of this before long. ” The constable look as wise a he could , and take up his staff of office : which have be recline indolently in the chimney-corner .
“ It ’ s a simple question of identity , you will observe , ” say the doctor .
“ That ’ s what it be , sir , ” reply the constable , cough with great violence ; for he have finish his ale in a hurry , and some of it have go the wrong way .
“ Here ’ s the house break into , ” say the doctor , “ and a couple of men catch one moment ’ s glimpse of a boy , in the midst of gunpowder smoke , and in all the distraction of alarm and darkness .
Here ’ s a boy come to that very same house , next morning , and because he happen to have his arm tie up , these men lay violent hand upon him—by do which , they place his life in great danger—and swear he be the thief .
Now , the question be , whether these men be justify by the fact ; if not , in what situation do they place themselves ? ” The constable nod profoundly .
He say , if that wasn ’ t law , he would be glad to know what be .
“ I ask you again , ” thunder the doctor , “ be you , on your solemn oath , able to identify that boy ? ” Brittles look doubtfully at Mr. Giles ; Mr. Giles look doubtfully at Brittles ; the constable put his hand behind his ear , to catch the reply ; the two woman and the tinker lean forward to listen ; the doctor glance keenly round ; when a ring be hear at the gate , and at the same moment , the sound of wheel .
“ It ’ s the runner ! ” cry Brittles , to all appearance much relieve .
“ The what ? ” exclaim the doctor , aghast in his turn .
“ The Bow Street officer , sir , ” reply Brittles , take up a candle ; “ me and Mr. Giles send for ’ em this morning. ” “ What ? ” cry the doctor .
“ Yes , ” reply Brittles ; “ I send a message up by the coachman , and I only wonder they weren ’ t here before , sir. ” “ You do , do you ?
Then confound your—slow coach down here ; that ’ s all , ” say the doctor , walk away .
CHAPTER XXXI .
INVOLVES A CRITICAL POSITION “ Who ’ s that ? ” inquired Brittles , open the door a little way , with the chain up , and peep out , shade the candle with his hand .
“ Open the door , ” reply a man outside ; “ it ’ s the officer from Bow Street , a be send to to-day. ” Much comfort by this assurance , Brittles open the door to it full width , and confront a portly man in a great-coat ; who walk in , without say anything more , and wipe his shoe on the mat , as coolly a if he live there .
“ Just send somebody out to relieve my mate , will you , young man ? ” say the officer ; “ he ’ s in the gig , a-minding the prad .
Have you get a coach ’ u here , that you could put it up in , for five or ten minute ? ” Brittles reply in the affirmative , and point out the building , the portly man step back to the garden-gate , and help his companion to put up the gig : while Brittles light them , in a state of great admiration .
This do , they return to the house , and , be show into a parlour , take off their great-coats and hat , and show like what they be .
The man who have knock at the door , be a stout personage of middle height , age about fifty : with shiny black hair , crop pretty close ; half-whiskers , a round face , and sharp eye .
The other be a red-headed , bony man , in top-boots ; with a rather ill-favoured countenance , and a turned-up sinister-looking nose .
“ Tell your governor that Blathers and Duff be here , will you ? ” say the stouter man , smooth down his hair , and lay a pair of handcuff on the table .
“ Oh !
Good-evening , master .
Can I have a word or two with you in private , if you please ? ” This be address to Mr. Losberne , who now make his appearance ; that gentleman , motion Brittles to retire , bring in the two lady , and shut the door .
“ This be the lady of the house , ” say Mr. Losberne , motion towards Mrs. Maylie .
Mr. Blathers make a bow .
Being desire to sit down , he put his hat on the floor , and take a chair , motion to Duff to do the same .
The latter gentleman , who do not appear quite so much accustom to good society , or quite so much at his ease in it—one of the two—seated himself , after undergo several muscular affection of the limb , and the head of his stick into his mouth , with some embarrassment .
“ Now , with regard to this here robbery , master , ” say Blathers .
“ What be the circumstance ? ” Mr. Losberne , who appear desirous of gain time , recount them at great length , and with much circumlocution .
Messrs. Blathers and Duff look very know meanwhile , and occasionally exchange a nod .
“ I can ’ t say , for certain , till I see the work , of course , ” say Blathers ; “ but my opinion at once be , —I don ’ t mind commit myself to that extent , —that this wasn ’ t do by a yokel ; eh , Duff ? ” “ Certainly not , ” reply Duff .
“ And , translate the word yokel for the benefit of the lady , I apprehend your meaning to be , that this attempt be not make by a countryman ? ” say Mr. Losberne , with a smile .
“ That ’ s it , master , ” reply Blathers .
“ This be all about the robbery , be it ? ” “ All , ” reply the doctor .
“ Now , what be this , about this here boy that the servant be a-talking on ? ” say Blathers .
“ Nothing at all , ” reply the doctor .
“ One of the frightened servant choose to take it into his head , that he have something to do with this attempt to break into the house ; but it ’ s nonsense : sheer absurdity. ” “ Wery easy dispose of , if it be , ” remark Duff .
“ What he say be quite correct , ” observe Blathers , nod his head in a confirmatory way , and play carelessly with the handcuff , a if they be a pair of castanets .
“ Who be the boy ?
What account do he give of himself ?
Where do he come from ?
He didn ’ t drop out of the cloud , do he , master ? ” “ Of course not , ” reply the doctor , with a nervous glance at the two lady .
“ I know his whole history : but we can talk about that presently .
You would like , first , to see the place where the thief make their attempt , I suppose ? ” “ Certainly , ” rejoin Mr. Blathers .
“ We have well inspect the premise first , and examine the servant afterwards .
That ’ s the usual way of do business. ” Lights be then procure ; and Messrs. Blathers and Duff , attend by the native constable , Brittles , Giles , and everybody else in short , go into the little room at the end of the passage and look out at the window ; and afterwards go round by way of the lawn , and look in at the window ; and after that , have a candle hand out to inspect the shutter with ; and after that , a lantern to trace the footstep with ; and after that , a pitchfork to poke the bush with .
This do , amidst the breathless interest of all beholder , they come in again ; and Mr. Giles and Brittles be put through a melodramatic representation of their share in the previous night ’ s adventure : which they perform some six time over : contradict each other , in not more than one important respect , the first time , and in not more than a dozen the last .
This consummation be arrive at , Blathers and Duff clear the room , and hold a long council together , compare with which , for secrecy and solemnity , a consultation of great doctor on the knotty point in medicine , would be mere child ’ s play .
Meanwhile , the doctor walk up and down the next room in a very uneasy state ; and Mrs. Maylie and Rose look on , with anxious face .
“ Upon my word , ” he say , make a halt , after a great number of very rapid turn , “ I hardly know what to do. ” “ Surely , ” say Rose , “ the poor child ’ s story , faithfully repeat to these men , will be sufficient to exonerate him. ” “ I doubt it , my dear young lady , ” say the doctor , shake his head .
“ I don ’ t think it would exonerate him , either with them , or with legal functionary of a high grade .
What be he , after all , they would say ?
A runaway .
Judged by mere worldly consideration and probability , his story be a very doubtful one. ” “ You believe it , surely ? ” interrupt Rose .
“ _I_ believe it , strange a it be ; and perhaps I may be an old fool for do so , ” rejoin the doctor ; “ but I don ’ t think it be exactly the tale for a practical police-officer , nevertheless. ” “ Why not ? ” demand Rose .
“ Because , my pretty cross-examiner , ” reply the doctor : “ because , view with their eye , there be many ugly point about it ; he can only prove the part that look ill , and none of those that look well .
Confound the fellow , they _will_ have the why and the wherefore , and will take nothing for grant .
On his own showing , you see , he have be the companion of thief for some time past ; he have be carry to a police-officer , on a charge of pick a gentleman ’ s pocket ; he have be take away , forcibly , from that gentleman ’ s house , to a place which he can not describe or point out , and of the situation of which he have not the remote idea .
He be bring down to Chertsey , by men who seem to have take a violent fancy to him , whether he will or no ; and be put through a window to rob a house ; and then , just at the very moment when he be go to alarm the inmate , and so do the very thing that would set him all to right , there rush into the way , a blunder dog of a half-bred butler , and shoot him !
As if on purpose to prevent his do any good for himself !
Don ’ t you see all this ? ” “ I see it , of course , ” reply Rose , smile at the doctor ’ s impetuosity ; “ but still I do not see anything in it , to criminate the poor child. ” “ No , ” reply the doctor ; “ of course not !
Bless the bright eye of your sex !
They never see , whether for good or bad , more than one side of any question ; and that be , always , the one which first present itself to them. ” Having give vent to this result of experience , the doctor put his hand into his pocket , and walk up and down the room with even great rapidity than before .
“ The more I think of it , ” say the doctor , “ the more I see that it will occasion endless trouble and difficulty if we put these men in possession of the boy ’ s real story .
I be certain it will not be believe ; and even if they can do nothing to him in the end , still the drag it forward , and give publicity to all the doubt that will be cast upon it , must interfere , materially , with your benevolent plan of rescue him from misery. ” “ Oh !
what be to be do ? ” cry Rose .
“ Dear , dear !
why do they send for these people ? ” “ Why , indeed ! ” exclaim Mrs. Maylie .
“ I would not have have them here , for the world. ” “ All I know be , ” say Mr. Losberne , at last : sit down with a kind of desperate calmness , “ that we must try and carry it off with a bold face .
The object be a good one , and that must be our excuse .
The boy have strong symptom of fever upon him , and be in no condition to be talk to any more ; that ’ s one comfort .
We must make the best of it ; and if bad be the best , it be no fault of ours .
Come in ! ” “ Well , master , ” say Blathers , enter the room follow by his colleague , and make the door fast , before he say any more .
“ This warn ’ t a put-up thing. ” “ And what the devil ’ s a put-up thing ? ” demand the doctor , impatiently .
“ We call it a put-up robbery , lady , ” say Blathers , turn to them , a if he pity their ignorance , but have a contempt for the doctor ’ s , “ when the servant be in it. ” “ Nobody suspect them , in this case , ” say Mrs. Maylie .
“ Wery likely not , ma ’ be , ” reply Blathers ; “ but they might have be in it , for all that. ” “ More likely on that wery account , ” say Duff .
“ We find it be a town hand , ” say Blathers , continue his report ; “ for the style of work be first-rate. ” “ Wery pretty indeed it be , ” remark Duff , in an undertone .
“ There be two of ’ em in it , ” continue Blathers ; “ and they have a boy with ’ em ; that ’ s plain from the size of the window .
That ’ s all to be say at present .
We ’ ll see this lad that you ’ ve get upstairs at once , if you please. ” “ Perhaps they will take something to drink first , Mrs. Maylie ? ” say the doctor : his face brightening , a if some new thought have occur to him .
“ Oh !
to be sure ! ” exclaim Rose , eagerly .
“ You shall have it immediately , if you will. ” “ Why , thank you , miss ! ” say Blathers , draw his coat-sleeve across his mouth ; “ it ’ s dry work , this sort of duty .
Anythink that ’ s handy , miss ; don ’ t put yourself out of the way , on our accounts. ” “ What shall it be ? ” ask the doctor , follow the young lady to the sideboard .
“ A little drop of spirit , master , if it ’ s all the same , ” reply Blathers .
“ It ’ s a cold ride from London , ma ’ be ; and I always find that spirit come home warmer to the feelings. ” This interesting communication be address to Mrs. Maylie , who receive it very graciously .
While it be be convey to her , the doctor slip out of the room .
“ Ah ! ” say Mr. Blathers : not hold his wine-glass by the stem , but grasp the bottom between the thumb and forefinger of his left hand : and place it in front of his chest ; “ I have see a good many piece of business like this , in my time , ladies. ” “ That crack down in the back lane at Edmonton , Blathers , ” say Mr. Duff , assist his colleague ’ s memory .
“ That be something in this way , warn ’ t it ? ” rejoin Mr. Blathers ; “ that be do by Conkey Chickweed , that was. ” “ You always give that to him ” reply Duff .
“ It be the Family Pet , I tell you .
Conkey hadn ’ t any more to do with it than I had. ” “ Get out ! ” retort Mr. Blathers ; “ I know well .
Do you mind that time when Conkey be rob of his money , though ?
What a start that be !
Better than any novel-book _I_ ever see ! ” “ What be that ? ” inquire Rose : anxious to encourage any symptom of good-humour in the unwelcome visitor .
“ It be a robbery , miss , that hardly anybody would have be down upon , ” say Blathers .
“ This here Conkey Chickweed— ” “ Conkey mean Nosey , ma ’ be , ” interpose Duff .
“ Of course the lady know that , don ’ t she ? ” demand Mr. Blathers .
“ Always interrupting , you be , partner !
This here Conkey Chickweed , miss , keep a public-house over Battlebridge way , and he have a cellar , where a good many young lord go to see cock-fighting , and badger-drawing , and that ; and a wery intellectual manner the sport be conduct in , for I ’ ve see ’ em off ’ en .
He warn ’ t one of the family , at that time ; and one night he be rob of three hundred and twenty-seven guinea in a canvas bag , that be steal out of his bedroom in the dead of night , by a tall man with a black patch over his eye , who have conceal himself under the bed , and after commit the robbery , jump slap out of window : which be only a story high .
He be wery quick about it .
But Conkey be quick , too ; for he fire a blunderbuss arter him , and rouse the neighbourhood .
They set up a hue-and-cry , directly , and when they come to look about ’ em , find that Conkey have hit the robber ; for there be trace of blood , all the way to some paling a good distance off ; and there they lose ’ em .
However , he have make off with the blunt ; and , consequently , the name of Mr. Chickweed , license witler , appear in the Gazette among the other bankrupt ; and all manner of benefit and subscription , and I don ’ t know what all , be get up for the poor man , who be in a wery low state of mind about his loss , and go up and down the street , for three or four day , a pull his hair off in such a desperate manner that many people be afraid he might be go to make away with himself .
One day he come up to the office , all in a hurry , and have a private interview with the magistrate , who , after a deal of talk , ring the bell , and order Jem Spyers in ( Jem be a active officer ) , and tell him to go and assist Mr. Chickweed in apprehend the man a rob his house .
‘ I see him , Spyers , ’ say Chickweed , ‘ pas my house yesterday morning , ’ ‘ Why didn ’ t you up , and collar him ! ’ say Spyers .
‘ I be so struck all of a heap , that you might have fracture my skull with a toothpick , ’ say the poor man ; ‘ but we ’ re sure to have him ; for between ten and eleven o ’ clock at night he pass again. ’ Spyers no sooner heard this , than he put some clean linen and a comb , in his pocket , in case he should have to stop a day or two ; and away he go , and set himself down at one of the public-house window behind the little red curtain , with his hat on , all ready to bolt out , at a moment ’ s notice .
He be smoke his pipe here , late at night , when all of a sudden Chickweed roar out , ‘ Here he be !
Stop thief !
Murder ! ’ Jem Spyers dash out ; and there he see Chickweed , a-tearing down the street full cry .
Away go Spyers ; on go Chickweed ; round turn the people ; everybody roar out , ‘ Thieves ! ’ and Chickweed himself keep on shout , all the time , like mad .
Spyers lose sight of him a minute a he turn a corner ; shoot round ; see a little crowd ; dive in ; ‘ Which be the man ? ’ ‘ D—me ! ’ say Chickweed , ‘ I ’ ve lose him again ! ’ It be a remarkable occurrence , but he warn ’ t to be see nowhere , so they go back to the public-house .
Next morning , Spyers take his old place , and look out , from behind the curtain , for a tall man with a black patch over his eye , till his own two eye ache again .
At last , he couldn ’ t help shut ’ em , to ease ’ em a minute ; and the very moment he do so , he hear Chickweed a-roaring out , ‘ Here he be ! ’ Off he start once more , with Chickweed half-way down the street ahead of him ; and after twice as long a run a the yesterday ’ s one , the man ’ s lose again !
This be do , once or twice more , till one-half the neighbour give out that Mr. Chickweed have be rob by the devil , who be play trick with him arterwards ; and the other half , that poor Mr. Chickweed have go mad with grief. ” “ What do Jem Spyers say ? ” inquire the doctor ; who have return to the room shortly after the commencement of the story .
“ Jem Spyers , ” resume the officer , “ for a long time say nothing at all , and listen to everything without seem to , which show he understand his business .
But , one morning , he walk into the bar , and take out his snuffbox , say ‘ Chickweed , I ’ ve find out who do this here robbery. ’ ‘ Have you ? ’ say Chickweed .
‘ Oh , my dear Spyers , only let me have wengeance , and I shall die contented !
Oh , my dear Spyers , where be the villain ! ’ ‘ Come ! ’ say Spyers , offer him a pinch of snuff , ‘ none of that gammon !
You do it yourself. ’ So he have ; and a good bit of money he have make by it , too ; and nobody would never have find it out , if he hadn ’ t be so precious anxious to keep up appearance ! ” say Mr. Blathers , put down his wine-glass , and clink the handcuff together .
“ Very curious , indeed , ” observe the doctor .
“ Now , if you please , you can walk upstairs. ” “ If _you_ please , sir , ” return Mr. Blathers .
Closely follow Mr. Losberne , the two officer ascend to Oliver ’ s bedroom ; Mr. Giles precede the party , with a lighted candle .
Oliver have be doze ; but look bad , and be more feverish than he have appear yet .
Being assist by the doctor , he manage to sit up in bed for a minute or so ; and look at the stranger without at all understand what be go forward—in fact , without seem to recollect where he be , or what have be pass .
“ This , ” say Mr. Losberne , speak softly , but with great vehemence notwithstanding , “ this be the lad , who , be accidently wound by a spring-gun in some boyish trespass on Mr. What-d ’ ye-call-him ’ s ground , at the back here , come to the house for assistance this morning , and be immediately laid hold of and maltreat , by that ingenious gentleman with the candle in his hand : who have place his life in considerable danger , a I can professionally certify. ” Messrs. Blathers and Duff look at Mr. Giles , a he be thus recommend to their notice .
The bewildered butler gaze from them towards Oliver , and from Oliver towards Mr. Losberne , with a most ludicrous mixture of fear and perplexity .
“ You don ’ t mean to deny that , I suppose ? ” say the doctor , lay Oliver gently down again .
“ It be all do for the—for the best , sir , ” answer Giles .
“ I be sure I think it be the boy , or I wouldn ’ t have meddle with him .
I be not of an inhuman disposition , sir. ” “ Thought it be what boy ? ” inquire the senior officer .
“ The housebreaker ’ s boy , sir ! ” reply Giles .
“ They—they certainly have a boy. ” “ Well ?
Do you think so now ? ” inquire Blathers .
“ Think what , now ? ” reply Giles , look vacantly at his questioner .
“ Think it ’ s the same boy , Stupid-head ? ” rejoin Blathers , impatiently .
“ I don ’ t know ; I really don ’ t know , ” say Giles , with a rueful countenance .
“ I couldn ’ t swear to him. ” “ What do you think ? ” ask Mr. Blathers .
“ I don ’ t know what to think , ” reply poor Giles .
“ I don ’ t think it be the boy ; indeed , I ’ m almost certain that it isn ’ t .
You know it can ’ t be. ” “ Has this man be a-drinking , sir ? ” inquire Blathers , turn to the doctor .
“ What a precious muddle-headed chap you be ! ” say Duff , address Mr. Giles , with supreme contempt .
Mr. Losberne have be feel the patient ’ s pulse during this short dialogue ; but he now rise from the chair by the bedside , and remark , that if the officer have any doubt upon the subject , they would perhaps like to step into the next room , and have Brittles before them .
Acting upon this suggestion , they adjourn to a neighbouring apartment , where Mr. Brittles , be call in , involve himself and his respected superior in such a wonderful maze of fresh contradiction and impossibility , a tend to throw no particular light on anything , but the fact of his own strong mystification ; except , indeed , his declaration that he shouldn ’ t know the real boy , if he be put before him that instant ; that he have only take Oliver to be he , because Mr. Giles have say he be ; and that Mr. Giles have , five minute previously , admit in the kitchen , that he begin to be very much afraid he have be a little too hasty .
Among other ingenious surmise , the question be then raise , whether Mr. Giles have really hit anybody ; and upon examination of the fellow pistol to that which he have fire , it turn out to have no more destructive loading than gunpowder and brown paper : a discovery which make a considerable impression on everybody but the doctor , who have draw the ball about ten minute before .
Upon no one , however , do it make a great impression than on Mr. Giles himself ; who , after labour , for some hour , under the fear of have mortally wound a fellow-creature , eagerly catch at this new idea , and favour it to the utmost .
Finally , the officer , without trouble themselves very much about Oliver , leave the Chertsey constable in the house , and take up their rest for that night in the town ; promise to return the next morning .
With the next morning , there come a rumour , that two men and a boy be in the cage at Kingston , who have be apprehend over night under suspicious circumstance ; and to Kingston Messrs. Blathers and Duff journey accordingly .
The suspicious circumstance , however , resolve themselves , on investigation , into the one fact , that they have be discover sleep under a haystack ; which , although a great crime , be only punishable by imprisonment , and be , in the merciful eye of the English law , and it comprehensive love of all the King ’ s subject , hold to be no satisfactory proof , in the absence of all other evidence , that the sleeper , or sleeper , have commit burglary accompany with violence , and have therefore rendered themselves liable to the punishment of death ; Messrs. Blathers and Duff come back again , as wise a they go .
In short , after some more examination , and a great deal more conversation , a neighbouring magistrate be readily induce to take the joint bail of Mrs. Maylie and Mr. Losberne for Oliver ’ s appearance if he should ever be call upon ; and Blathers and Duff , be reward with a couple of guinea , return to town with divided opinion on the subject of their expedition : the latter gentleman on a mature consideration of all the circumstance , incline to the belief that the burglarious attempt have originate with the Family Pet ; and the former be equally dispose to concede the full merit of it to the great Mr. Conkey Chickweed .
Meanwhile , Oliver gradually thrive and prosper under the united care of Mrs. Maylie , Rose , and the kind-hearted Mr. Losberne .
If fervent prayer , gush from heart overcharge with gratitude , be hear in heaven—and if they be not , what prayer be ! —the blessing which the orphan child call down upon them , sink into their soul , diffuse peace and happiness .
CHAPTER XXXII .
OF THE HAPPY LIFE OLIVER BEGAN TO LEAD WITH HIS KIND FRIENDS Oliver ’ s ailings be neither slight nor few .
In addition to the pain and delay attendant on a broken limb , his exposure to the wet and cold have bring on fever and ague : which hang about him for many week , and reduce him sadly .
But , at length , he begin , by slow degree , to get good , and to be able to say sometimes , in a few tearful word , how deeply he felt the goodness of the two sweet lady , and how ardently he hop that when he grow strong and well again , he could do something to show his gratitude ; only something , which would let them see the love and duty with which his breast be full ; something , however slight , which would prove to them that their gentle kindness have not be cast away ; but that the poor boy whom their charity have rescue from misery , or death , be eager to serve them with his whole heart and soul .
“ Poor fellow ! ” say Rose , when Oliver have be one day feebly endeavour to utter the word of thankfulness that rise to his pale lip ; “ you shall have many opportunity of serve u , if you will .
We be go into the country , and my aunt intend that you shall accompany u .
The quiet place , the pure air , and all the pleasure and beauty of spring , will restore you in a few day .
We will employ you in a hundred way , when you can bear the trouble. ” “ The trouble ! ” cry Oliver .
“ Oh !
dear lady , if I could but work for you ; if I could only give you pleasure by water your flower , or watch your bird , or run up and down the whole day long , to make you happy ; what would I give to do it ! ” “ You shall give nothing at all , ” say Miss Maylie , smile ; “ for , a I tell you before , we shall employ you in a hundred way ; and if you only take half the trouble to please u , that you promise now , you will make me very happy indeed. ” “ Happy , ma ’ be ! ” cry Oliver ; “ how kind of you to say so ! ” “ You will make me happy than I can tell you , ” reply the young lady .
“ To think that my dear good aunt should have be the mean of rescue any one from such sad misery a you have describe to u , would be an unspeakable pleasure to me ; but to know that the object of her goodness and compassion be sincerely grateful and attached , in consequence , would delight me , more than you can well imagine .
Do you understand me ? ” she inquire , watch Oliver ’ s thoughtful face .
“ Oh yes , ma ’ be , yes ! ” reply Oliver eagerly ; “ but I be think that I be ungrateful now. ” “ To whom ? ” inquire the young lady .
“ To the kind gentleman , and the dear old nurse , who take so much care of me before , ” rejoin Oliver .
“ If they know how happy I be , they would be pleased , I be sure. ” “ I be sure they would , ” rejoin Oliver ’ s benefactress ; “ and Mr. Losberne have already be kind enough to promise that when you be well enough to bear the journey , he will carry you to see them. ” “ Has he , ma ’ be ? ” cry Oliver , his face brighten with pleasure .
“ I don ’ t know what I shall do for joy when I see their kind face once again ! ” In a short time Oliver be sufficiently recover to undergo the fatigue of this expedition .
One morning he and Mr. Losberne set out , accordingly , in a little carriage which belong to Mrs. Maylie .
When they come to Chertsey Bridge , Oliver turn very pale , and utter a loud exclamation .
“ What ’ s the matter with the boy ? ” cry the doctor , a usual , all in a bustle .
“ Do you see anything—hear anything—feel anything—eh ? ” “ That , sir , ” cry Oliver , point out of the carriage window .
“ That house ! ” “ Yes ; well , what of it ?
Stop coachman .
Pull up here , ” cry the doctor .
“ What of the house , my man ; eh ? ” “ The thieves—the house they take me to ! ” whisper Oliver .
“ The devil it be ! ” cry the doctor .
“ Hallo , there !
let me out ! ” But , before the coachman could dismount from his box , he have tumble out of the coach , by some mean or other ; and , run down to the deserted tenement , begin kick at the door like a madman .
“ Halloa ? ” say a little ugly hump-backed man : open the door so suddenly , that the doctor , from the very impetus of his last kick , nearly fell forward into the passage .
“ What ’ s the matter here ? ” “ Matter ! ” exclaim the other , collar him , without a moment ’ s reflection .
“ A good deal .
Robbery be the matter. ” “ There ’ ll be Murder the matter , too , ” reply the hump-backed man , coolly , “ if you don ’ t take your hand off .
Do you hear me ? ” “ I hear you , ” say the doctor , give his captive a hearty shake .
“ Where ’ s—confound the fellow , what ’ s his rascally name—Sikes ; that ’ s it .
Where ’ s Sikes , you thief ? ” The hump-backed man star , a if in excess of amazement and indignation ; then , twist himself , dexterously , from the doctor ’ s grasp , growl forth a volley of horrid oath , and retire into the house .
Before he could shut the door , however , the doctor have pass into the parlour , without a word of parley .
He look anxiously round ; not an article of furniture ; not a vestige of anything , animate or inanimate ; not even the position of the cupboard ; answer Oliver ’ s description !
“ Now ! ” say the hump-backed man , who have watch him keenly , “ what do you mean by come into my house , in this violent way ?
Do you want to rob me , or to murder me ?
Which be it ? ” “ Did you ever know a man come out to do either , in a chariot and pair , you ridiculous old vampire ? ” say the irritable doctor .
“ What do you want , then ? ” demand the hunchback .
“ Will you take yourself off , before I do you a mischief ?
Curse you ! ” “ As soon a I think proper , ” say Mr. Losberne , look into the other parlour ; which , like the first , bore no resemblance whatever to Oliver ’ s account of it .
“ I shall find you out , some day , my friend. ” “ Will you ? ” sneer the ill-favoured cripple .
“ If you ever want me , I ’ m here .
I haven ’ t live here mad and all alone , for five-and-twenty year , to be scar by you .
You shall pay for this ; you shall pay for this. ” And so saying , the mis-shapen little demon set up a yell , and dance upon the ground , a if wild with rage .
“ Stupid enough , this , ” mutter the doctor to himself ; “ the boy must have make a mistake .
Here !
Put that in your pocket , and shut yourself up again. ” With these word he fling the hunchback a piece of money , and return to the carriage .
The man follow to the chariot door , utter the wild imprecation and curse all the way ; but a Mr. Losberne turn to speak to the driver , he look into the carriage , and eye Oliver for an instant with a glance so sharp and fierce and at the same time so furious and vindictive , that , wake or sleeping , he could not forget it for month afterwards .
He continue to utter the most fearful imprecation , until the driver have resume his seat ; and when they be once more on their way , they could see him some distance behind : beat his foot upon the ground , and tear his hair , in transport of real or pretended rage .
“ I be an as ! ” say the doctor , after a long silence .
“ Did you know that before , Oliver ? ” “ No , sir. ” “ Then don ’ t forget it another time. ” “ An as , ” say the doctor again , after a further silence of some minute .
“ Even if it have be the right place , and the right fellow have be there , what could I have do , single-handed ?
And if I have have assistance , I see no good that I should have do , except lead to my own exposure , and an unavoidable statement of the manner in which I have hush up this business .
That would have serve me right , though .
I be always involve myself in some scrape or other , by act on impulse .
It might have do me good. ” Now , the fact be that the excellent doctor have never act upon anything but impulse all through his life , and it be no bad compliment to the nature of the impulse which govern him , that so far from be involve in any peculiar trouble or misfortune , he have the warm respect and esteem of all who know him .
If the truth must be tell , he be a little out of temper , for a minute or two , at be disappoint in procure corroborative evidence of Oliver ’ s story on the very first occasion on which he have a chance of obtain any .
He soon come round again , however ; and find that Oliver ’ s reply to his question , be still a straightforward and consistent , and still deliver with as much apparent sincerity and truth , a they have ever be , he make up his mind to attach full credence to them , from that time forth .
As Oliver know the name of the street in which Mr. Brownlow reside , they be enable to drive straight thither .
When the coach turn into it , his heart beat so violently , that he could scarcely draw his breath .
“ Now , my boy , which house be it ? ” inquire Mr. Losberne .
“ That !
That ! ” reply Oliver , point eagerly out of the window .
“ The white house .
Oh !
make haste !
Pray make haste !
I feel a if I should die : it make me tremble so. ” “ Come , come ! ” say the good doctor , pat him on the shoulder .
“ You will see them directly , and they will be overjoy to find you safe and well. ” “ Oh !
I hope so ! ” cry Oliver .
“ They be so good to me ; so very , very good to me. ” The coach roll on .
It stop .
No ; that be the wrong house ; the next door .
It go on a few pace , and stop again .
Oliver look up at the window , with tear of happy expectation course down his face .
Alas !
the white house be empty , and there be a bill in the window .
“ To Let. ” “ Knock at the next door , ” cry Mr. Losberne , take Oliver ’ s arm in his .
“ What have become of Mr. Brownlow , who use to live in the adjoining house , do you know ? ” The servant do not know ; but would go and inquire .
She presently return , and say , that Mr. Brownlow have sell off his good , and go to the West Indies , six week before .
Oliver clasp his hand , and sink feebly backward .
“ Has his housekeeper go too ? ” inquire Mr. Losberne , after a moment ’ s pause .
“ Yes , sir ” ; reply the servant .
“ The old gentleman , the housekeeper , and a gentleman who be a friend of Mr. Brownlow ’ s , all go together. ” “ Then turn towards home again , ” say Mr. Losberne to the driver ; “ and don ’ t stop to bait the horse , till you get out of this confounded London ! ” “ The book-stall keeper , sir ? ” say Oliver .
“ I know the way there .
See him , pray , sir !
Do see him ! ” “ My poor boy , this be disappointment enough for one day , ” say the doctor .
“ Quite enough for both of u .
If we go to the book-stall keeper ’ s , we shall certainly find that he be dead , or have set his house on fire , or run away .
No ; home again straight ! ” And in obedience to the doctor ’ s impulse , home they go .
This bitter disappointment cause Oliver much sorrow and grief , even in the midst of his happiness ; for he have please himself , many time during his illness , with thinking of all that Mr. Brownlow and Mrs. Bedwin would say to him : and what delight it would be to tell them how many long day and night he have pass in reflect on what they have do for him , and in bewail his cruel separation from them .
The hope of eventually clear himself with them , too , and explain how he have be force away , have buoy him up , and sustain him , under many of his recent trial ; and now , the idea that they should have go so far , and carry with them the belief that he be an impostor and a robber—a belief which might remain uncontradicted to his dying day—was almost more than he could bear .
The circumstance occasion no alteration , however , in the behaviour of his benefactor .
After another fortnight , when the fine warm weather have fairly begin , and every tree and flower be put forth it young leaf and rich blossom , they make preparation for quit the house at Chertsey , for some month .
Sending the plate , which have so excited Fagin ’ s cupidity , to the banker ’ s ; and leave Giles and another servant in care of the house , they depart to a cottage at some distance in the country , and take Oliver with them .
Who can describe the pleasure and delight , the peace of mind and soft tranquillity , the sickly boy felt in the balmy air , and among the green hill and rich wood , of an inland village !
Who can tell how scene of peace and quietude sink into the mind of pain-worn dweller in close and noisy place , and carry their own freshness , deep into their jaded heart !
Men who have live in crowded , pent-up street , through life of toil , and who have never wish for change ; men , to whom custom have indeed be second nature , and who have come almost to love each brick and stone that form the narrow boundary of their daily walk ; even they , with the hand of death upon them , have be know to yearn at last for one short glimpse of Nature ’ s face ; and , carry far from the scene of their old pain and pleasure , have seem to pass at once into a new state of be .
Crawling forth , from day to day , to some green sunny spot , they have have such memory waken up within them by the sight of the sky , and hill and plain , and glisten water , that a foretaste of heaven itself have soothe their quick decline , and they have sink into their tomb , as peacefully a the sun whose set they watch from their lonely chamber window but a few hour before , fade from their dim and feeble sight !
The memory which peaceful country scene call up , be not of this world , nor of it thought and hope .
Their gentle influence may teach u how to weave fresh garland for the graf of those we love : may purify our thought , and bear down before it old enmity and hatred ; but beneath all this , there lingers , in the least reflective mind , a vague and half-formed consciousness of have hold such feeling long before , in some remote and distant time , which call up solemn thought of distant time to come , and bend down pride and worldliness beneath it .
It be a lovely spot to which they repair .
Oliver , whose day have be spend among squalid crowd , and in the midst of noise and brawling , seem to enter on a new existence there .
The rise and honeysuckle clung to the cottage wall ; the ivy crept round the trunk of the tree ; and the garden-flowers perfume the air with delicious odour .
Hard by , be a little churchyard ; not crowd with tall unsightly gravestone , but full of humble mound , cover with fresh turf and moss : beneath which , the old people of the village lay at rest .
Oliver often wander here ; and , think of the wretched grave in which his mother lay , would sometimes sit him down and sob unseen ; but , when he raise his eye to the deep sky overhead , he would cease to think of her a lie in the ground , and would weep for her , sadly , but without pain .
It be a happy time .
The day be peaceful and serene ; the night bring with them neither fear nor care ; no languishing in a wretched prison , or associate with wretched men ; nothing but pleasant and happy thought .
Every morning he go to a white-headed old gentleman , who live near the little church : who teach him to read good , and to write : and who speak so kindly , and take such pain , that Oliver could never try enough to please him .
Then , he would walk with Mrs. Maylie and Rose , and hear them talk of book ; or perhaps sit near them , in some shady place , and listen whilst the young lady read : which he could have do , until it grow too dark to see the letter .
Then , he have his own lesson for the next day to prepare ; and at this , he would work hard , in a little room which look into the garden , till even come slowly on , when the lady would walk out again , and he with them : listen with such pleasure to all they say : and so happy if they want a flower that he could climb to reach , or have forget anything he could run to fetch : that he could never be quick enough about it .
When it become quite dark , and they return home , the young lady would sit down to the piano , and play some pleasant air , or sing , in a low and gentle voice , some old song which it please her aunt to hear .
There would be no candle light at such time a these ; and Oliver would sit by one of the window , listen to the sweet music , in a perfect rapture .
And when Sunday come , how differently the day be spend , from any way in which he have ever spend it yet !
and how happily too ; like all the other day in that most happy time !
There be the little church , in the morning , with the green leave flutter at the window : the bird sing without : and the sweet-smelling air steal in at the low porch , and fill the homely building with it fragrance .
The poor people be so neat and clean , and kneel so reverently in prayer , that it seem a pleasure , not a tedious duty , their assembling there together ; and though the singing might be rude , it be real , and sound more musical ( to Oliver ’ s ear at least ) than any he have ever hear in church before .
Then , there be the walk a usual , and many call at the clean house of the labour men ; and at night , Oliver read a chapter or two from the Bible , which he have be study all the week , and in the performance of which duty he felt more proud and please , than if he have be the clergyman himself .
In the morning , Oliver would be a-foot by six o ’ clock , roam the field , and plunder the hedge , far and wide , for nosegay of wild flower , with which he would return laden , home ; and which it take great care and consideration to arrange , to the best advantage , for the embellishment of the breakfast-table .
There be fresh groundsel , too , for Miss Maylie ’ s bird , with which Oliver , who have be study the subject under the able tuition of the village clerk , would decorate the cage , in the most approved taste .
When the bird be make all spruce and smart for the day , there be usually some little commission of charity to execute in the village ; or , fail that , there be rare cricket-playing , sometimes , on the green ; or , fail that , there be always something to do in the garden , or about the plant , to which Oliver ( who have study this science also , under the same master , who be a gardener by trade , ) apply himself with hearty good-will , until Miss Rose make her appearance : when there be a thousand commendation to be bestow on all he have do .
So three month glide away ; three month which , in the life of the most blessed and favour of mortal , might have be unmingled happiness , and which , in Oliver ’ s be true felicity .
With the purest and most amiable generosity on one side ; and the truest , warm , soul-felt gratitude on the other ; it be no wonder that , by the end of that short time , Oliver Twist have become completely domesticate with the old lady and her niece , and that the fervent attachment of his young and sensitive heart , be repay by their pride in , and attachment to , himself .
CHAPTER XXXIII .
WHEREIN THE HAPPINESS OF OLIVER AND HIS FRIENDS , EXPERIENCES A SUDDEN CHECK Spring fly swiftly by , and summer come .
If the village have be beautiful at first it be now in the full glow and luxuriance of it richness .
The great tree , which have look shrunken and bare in the early month , have now burst into strong life and health ; and stretch forth their green arm over the thirsty ground , convert open and naked spot into choice nook , where be a deep and pleasant shade from which to look upon the wide prospect , steep in sunshine , which lay stretch beyond .
The earth have don her mantle of bright green ; and shed her richest perfume abroad .
It be the prime and vigour of the year ; all thing be glad and flourishing .
Still , the same quiet life go on at the little cottage , and the same cheerful serenity prevail among it inmate .
Oliver have long since grow stout and healthy ; but health or sickness make no difference in his warm feeling of a great many people .
He be still the same gentle , attach , affectionate creature that he have be when pain and suffering have waste his strength , and when he be dependent for every slight attention , and comfort on those who tend him .
One beautiful night , when they have take a longer walk than be customary with them : for the day have be unusually warm , and there be a brilliant moon , and a light wind have spring up , which be unusually refresh .
Rose have be in high spirit , too , and they have walk on , in merry conversation , until they have far exceed their ordinary bound .
Mrs. Maylie be fatigue , they return more slowly home .
The young lady merely throw off her simple bonnet , sit down to the piano a usual .
After run abstractedly over the key for a few minute , she fell into a low and very solemn air ; and a she play it , they hear a sound a if she be weep .
“ Rose , my dear ! ” say the elder lady .
Rose make no reply , but play a little quicker , a though the word have rouse her from some painful thought .
“ Rose , my love ! ” cry Mrs. Maylie , rise hastily , and bending over her .
“ What be this ?
In tear !
My dear child , what distress you ? ” “ Nothing , aunt ; nothing , ” reply the young lady .
“ I don ’ t know what it be ; I can ’ t describe it ; but I feel— ” “ Not ill , my love ? ” interpose Mrs. Maylie .
“ No , no !
Oh , not ill ! ” reply Rose : shuddering a though some deadly chillness be pass over her , while she speak ; “ I shall be well presently .
Close the window , pray ! ” Oliver hasten to comply with her request .
The young lady , make an effort to recover her cheerfulness , strive to play some lively tune ; but her finger drop powerless over the key .
Covering her face with her hand , she sink upon a sofa , and give vent to the tear which she be now unable to repress .
“ My child ! ” say the elderly lady , fold her arm about her , “ I never saw you so before. ” “ I would not alarm you if I could avoid it , ” rejoin Rose ; “ but indeed I have try very hard , and can not help this .
I fear I _am_ ill , aunt. ” She be , indeed ; for , when candle be bring , they saw that in the very short time which have elapse since their return home , the hue of her countenance have change to a marble whiteness .
Its expression have lose nothing of it beauty ; but it be change ; and there be an anxious haggard look about the gentle face , which it have never wear before .
Another minute , and it be suffuse with a crimson flush : and a heavy wildness come over the soft blue eye .
Again this disappear , like the shadow throw by a passing cloud ; and she be once more deadly pale .
Oliver , who watch the old lady anxiously , observe that she be alarm by these appearance ; and so in truth , be he ; but see that she affect to make light of them , he endeavour to do the same , and they so far succeeded , that when Rose be persuade by her aunt to retire for the night , she be in good spirit ; and appear even in good health : assure them that she felt certain she should rise in the morning , quite well .
“ I hope , ” say Oliver , when Mrs. Maylie return , “ that nothing be the matter ?
She don ’ t look well to-night , but— ” The old lady motion to him not to speak ; and sit herself down in a dark corner of the room , remain silent for some time .
At length , she say , in a trembling voice : “ I hope not , Oliver .
I have be very happy with her for some year : too happy , perhaps .
It may be time that I should meet with some misfortune ; but I hope it be not this. ” “ What ? ” inquire Oliver .
“ The heavy blow , ” say the old lady , “ of lose the dear girl who have so long be my comfort and happiness. ” “ Oh !
God forbid ! ” exclaim Oliver , hastily .
“ Amen to that , my child ! ” say the old lady , wring her hand .
“ Surely there be no danger of anything so dreadful ? ” say Oliver .
“ Two hour ago , she be quite well. ” “ She be very ill now , ” rejoin Mrs. Maylies ; “ and will be bad , I be sure .
My dear , dear Rose !
Oh , what shall I do without her ! ” She give way to such great grief , that Oliver , suppress his own emotion , venture to remonstrate with her ; and to beg , earnestly , that , for the sake of the dear young lady herself , she would be more calm .
“ And consider , ma ’ be , ” say Oliver , a the tear force themselves into his eye , despite of his effort to the contrary .
“ Oh !
consider how young and good she be , and what pleasure and comfort she give to all about her .
I be sure—certain—quite certain—that , for your sake , who be so good yourself ; and for her own ; and for the sake of all she make so happy ; she will not die .
Heaven will never let her die so young. ” “ Hush ! ” say Mrs. Maylie , lay her hand on Oliver ’ s head .
“ You think like a child , poor boy .
But you teach me my duty , notwithstanding .
I have forget it for a moment , Oliver , but I hope I may be pardon , for I be old , and have see enough of illness and death to know the agony of separation from the object of our love .
I have see enough , too , to know that it be not always the young and best who be spar to those that love them ; but this should give u comfort in our sorrow ; for Heaven be just ; and such thing teach u , impressively , that there be a brighter world than this ; and that the passage to it be speedy .
God ’ s will be do !
I love her ; and He know how well ! ” Oliver be surprise to see that a Mrs. Maylie say these word , she check her lamentation a though by one effort ; and draw herself up a she speak , become composed and firm .
He be still more astonished to find that this firmness last ; and that , under all the care and watch which ensue , Mrs. Maylie be ever ready and collect : perform all the duty which have devolve upon her , steadily , and , to all external appearance , even cheerfully .
But he be young , and do not know what strong mind be capable of , under try circumstance .
How should he , when their possessor so seldom know themselves ?
An anxious night ensue .
When morning come , Mrs. Maylie ’ s prediction be but too well verify .
Rose be in the first stage of a high and dangerous fever .
“ We must be active , Oliver , and not give way to useless grief , ” say Mrs. Maylie , lay her finger on her lip , a she look steadily into his face ; “ this letter must be send , with all possible expedition , to Mr. Losberne .
It must be carry to the market-town : which be not more than four mile off , by the footpath across the field : and thence dispatch , by an express on horseback , straight to Chertsey .
The people at the inn will undertake to do this : and I can trust to you to see it do , I know. ” Oliver could make no reply , but look his anxiety to be go at once .
“ Here be another letter , ” say Mrs. Maylie , pause to reflect ; “ but whether to send it now , or wait until I see how Rose go on , I scarcely know .
I would not forward it , unless I fear the worst. ” “ Is it for Chertsey , too , ma ’ be ? ” inquire Oliver ; impatient to execute his commission , and hold out his tremble hand for the letter .
“ No , ” reply the old lady , give it to him mechanically .
Oliver glance at it , and saw that it be direct to Harry Maylie , Esquire , at some great lord ’ s house in the country ; where , he could not make out .
“ Shall it go , ma ’ be ? ” ask Oliver , look up , impatiently .
“ I think not , ” reply Mrs. Maylie , take it back .
“ I will wait until to-morrow. ” With these word , she give Oliver her purse , and he start off , without more delay , at the great speed he could muster .
Swiftly he run across the field , and down the little lane which sometimes divide them : now almost hide by the high corn on either side , and now emerge on an open field , where the mower and haymaker be busy at their work : nor do he stop once , save now and then , for a few second , to recover breath , until he come , in a great heat , and cover with dust , on the little market-place of the market-town .
Here he pause , and look about for the inn .
There be a white bank , and a red brewery , and a yellow town-hall ; and in one corner there be a large house , with all the wood about it paint green : before which be the sign of “ The George. ” To this he hasten , as soon a it catch his eye .
He speak to a postboy who be doze under the gateway ; and who , after hear what he want , refer him to the ostler ; who after hear all he have to say again , refer him to the landlord ; who be a tall gentleman in a blue neckcloth , a white hat , drab breech , and boot with top to match , lean against a pump by the stable-door , pick his teeth with a silver toothpick .
This gentleman walk with much deliberation into the bar to make out the bill : which take a long time make out : and after it be ready , and pay , a horse have to be saddle , and a man to be dress , which take up ten good minute more .
Meanwhile Oliver be in such a desperate state of impatience and anxiety , that he felt a if he could have jump upon the horse himself , and gallop away , full tear , to the next stage .
At length , all be ready ; and the little parcel have be hand up , with many injunction and entreaty for it speedy delivery , the man set spur to his horse , and rattle over the uneven paving of the market-place , be out of the town , and gallop along the turnpike-road , in a couple of minute .
As it be something to feel certain that assistance be send for , and that no time have be lose , Oliver hurry up the inn-yard , with a somewhat light heart .
He be turn out of the gateway when he accidently stumble against a tall man wrap in a cloak , who be at that moment come out of the inn door .
“ Hah ! ” cry the man , fix his eye on Oliver , and suddenly recoil .
“ What the devil ’ s this ? ” “ I beg your pardon , sir , ” say Oliver ; “ I be in a great hurry to get home , and didn ’ t see you be coming. ” “ Death ! ” mutter the man to himself , glare at the boy with his large dark eye .
“ Who would have think it !
Grind him to ash !
He ’ d start up from a stone coffin , to come in my way ! ” “ I be sorry , ” stammer Oliver , confuse by the strange man ’ s wild look .
“ I hope I have not hurt you ! ” “ Rot you ! ” murmur the man , in a horrible passion ; between his clenched teeth ; “ if I have only have the courage to say the word , I might have be free of you in a night .
Curses on your head , and black death on your heart , you imp !
What be you do here ? ” The man shake his fist , a he utter these word incoherently .
He advance towards Oliver , a if with the intention of aim a blow at him , but fell violently on the ground : writhing and foaming , in a fit .
Oliver gaze , for a moment , at the struggle of the madman ( for such he suppose him to be ) ; and then dart into the house for help .
Having see him safely carry into the hotel , he turn his face homewards , run as fast a he could , to make up for lose time : and recall with a great deal of astonishment and some fear , the extraordinary behaviour of the person from whom he have just part .
The circumstance do not dwell in his recollection long , however : for when he reach the cottage , there be enough to occupy his mind , and to drive all consideration of self completely from his memory .
Rose Maylie have rapidly grown worse ; before mid-night she be delirious .
A medical practitioner , who reside on the spot , be in constant attendance upon her ; and after first see the patient , he have take Mrs. Maylie aside , and pronounce her disorder to be one of a most alarming nature .
“ In fact , ” he say , “ it would be little short of a miracle , if she recovered. ” How often do Oliver start from his bed that night , and steal out , with noiseless footstep , to the staircase , listen for the slight sound from the sick chamber !
How often do a tremble shake his frame , and cold drop of terror start upon his brow , when a sudden trampling of foot cause him to fear that something too dreadful to think of , have even then occur !
And what have be the fervency of all the prayer he have ever mutter , compare with those he pour forth , now , in the agony and passion of his supplication for the life and health of the gentle creature , who be totter on the deep grave ’ s verge !
Oh !
the suspense , the fearful , acute suspense , of stand idly by while the life of one we dearly love , be tremble in the balance !
Oh !
the rack thought that crowd upon the mind , and make the heart beat violently , and the breath come thick , by the force of the image they conjure up before it ; the desperate anxiety _to be do something_ to relieve the pain , or lessen the danger , which we have no power to alleviate ; the sinking of soul and spirit , which the sad remembrance of our helplessness produce ; what torture can equal these ; what reflections or endeavour can , in the full tide and fever of the time , allay them !
Morning come ; and the little cottage be lonely and still .
People speak in whisper ; anxious face appear at the gate , from time to time ; woman and child go away in tear .
All the livelong day , and for hour after it have grow dark , Oliver pace softly up and down the garden , raise his eye every instant to the sick chamber , and shudder to see the darken window , look a if death lay stretch inside .
Late that night , Mr. Losberne arrive .
“ It be hard , ” say the good doctor , turn away a he speak ; “ so young ; so much beloved ; but there be very little hope. ” Another morning .
The sun shone brightly ; as brightly a if it look upon no misery or care ; and , with every leaf and flower in full bloom about her ; with life , and health , and sound and sight of joy , surround her on every side : the fair young creature lay , waste fast .
Oliver creep away to the old churchyard , and sit down on one of the green mound , wept and prayed for her , in silence .
There be such peace and beauty in the scene ; so much of brightness and mirth in the sunny landscape ; such blithesome music in the song of the summer bird ; such freedom in the rapid flight of the rook , career overhead ; so much of life and joyousness in all ; that , when the boy raise his ache eye , and look about , the thought instinctively occur to him , that this be not a time for death ; that Rose could surely never die when humbler thing be all so glad and gay ; that grave be for cold and cheerless winter : not for sunlight and fragrance .
He almost think that shroud be for the old and shrunken ; and that they never wrap the young and graceful form in their ghastly fold .
A knell from the church bell break harshly on these youthful thought .
Another !
Again !
It be toll for the funeral service .
A group of humble mourner enter the gate : wear white favour ; for the corpse be young .
They stand uncover by a grave ; and there be a mother—a mother once—among the weep train .
But the sun shone brightly , and the bird sing on .
Oliver turn homeward , think on the many kindness he have receive from the young lady , and wish that the time could come again , that he might never cease show her how grateful and attach he be .
He have no cause for self-reproach on the score of neglect , or want of thought , for he have be devote to her service ; and yet a hundred little occasion rise up before him , on which he fancy he might have be more zealous , and more earnest , and wish he have be .
We need be careful how we deal with those about u , when every death carry to some small circle of survivor , thought of so much omit , and so little done—of so many thing forget , and so many more which might have be repair !
There be no remorse so deep a that which be unavailing ; if we would be spar it torture , let u remember this , in time .
When he reach home Mrs. Maylie be sit in the little parlour .
Oliver ’ s heart sank at sight of her ; for she have never leave the bedside of her niece ; and he tremble to think what change could have drive her away .
He learn that she have fall into a deep sleep , from which she would waken , either to recovery and life , or to bid them farewell , and die .
They sit , listen , and afraid to speak , for hour .
The untasted meal be remove , with look which show that their thought be elsewhere , they watch the sun a he sink low and low , and , at length , cast over sky and earth those brilliant hue which herald his departure .
Their quick ear catch the sound of an approaching footstep .
They both involuntarily dart to the door , a Mr. Losberne enter .
“ What of Rose ? ” cry the old lady .
“ Tell me at once !
I can bear it ; anything but suspense !
Oh , tell me !
in the name of Heaven ! ” “ You must compose yourself , ” say the doctor support her .
“ Be calm , my dear ma ’ be , pray. ” “ Let me go , in God ’ s name !
My dear child !
She be dead !
She be die ! ” “ No ! ” cry the doctor , passionately .
“ As He be good and merciful , she will live to bless u all , for year to come. ” The lady fell upon her knee , and try to fold her hand together ; but the energy which have support her so long , flee up to Heaven with her first thanksgiving ; and she sink into the friendly arm which be extend to receive her .
CHAPTER XXXIV .
CONTAINS SOME INTRODUCTORY PARTICULARS RELATIVE TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO NOW ARRIVES UPON THE SCENE ; AND A NEW ADVENTURE WHICH HAPPENED TO OLIVER It be almost too much happiness to bear .
Oliver felt stunned and stupefy by the unexpected intelligence ; he could not weep , or speak , or rest .
He have scarcely the power of understand anything that have pass , until , after a long ramble in the quiet evening air , a burst of tear come to his relief , and he seem to awaken , all at once , to a full sense of the joyful change that have occur , and the almost insupportable load of anguish which have be take from his breast .
The night be fast closing in , when he return homeward : laden with flower which he have cull , with peculiar care , for the adornment of the sick chamber .
As he walk briskly along the road , he hear behind him , the noise of some vehicle , approach at a furious pace .
Looking round , he saw that it be a post-chaise , drive at great speed ; and a the horse be gallop , and the road be narrow , he stand lean against a gate until it should have pass him .
As it dash on , Oliver catch a glimpse of a man in a white nightcap , whose face seem familiar to him , although his view be so brief that he could not identify the person .
In another second or two , the nightcap be thrust out of the chaise-window , and a stentorian voice bellow to the driver to stop : which he do , as soon a he could pull up his horse .
Then , the nightcap once again appeared : and the same voice call Oliver by his name .
“ Here ! ” cry the voice .
“ Oliver , what ’ s the news ?
Miss Rose !
Master O-li-ver ! ” “ Is it you , Giles ? ” cry Oliver , run up to the chaise-door .
Giles pop out his nightcap again , preparatory to make some reply , when he be suddenly pull back by a young gentleman who occupy the other corner of the chaise , and who eagerly demand what be the news .
“ In a word ! ” cry the gentleman , “ Better or bad ? ” “ Better—much good ! ” reply Oliver , hastily .
“ Thank Heaven ! ” exclaim the gentleman .
“ You be sure ? ” “ Quite , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ The change take place only a few hour ago ; and Mr. Losberne say , that all danger be at an end. ” The gentleman say not another word , but , open the chaise-door , leap out , and take Oliver hurriedly by the arm , lead him aside .
“ You be quite certain ?
There be no possibility of any mistake on your part , my boy , be there ? ” demand the gentleman in a tremulous voice .
“ Do not deceive me , by awaken hope that be not to be fulfilled. ” “ I would not for the world , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ Indeed you may believe me .
Mr. Losberne ’ s word be , that she would live to bless u all for many year to come .
I hear him say so. ” The tear stand in Oliver ’ s eye a he recall the scene which be the beginning of so much happiness ; and the gentleman turn his face away , and remain silent , for some minute .
Oliver think he hear him sob , more than once ; but he fear to interrupt him by any fresh remark—for he could well guess what his feeling were—and so stood apart , feign to be occupy with his nosegay .
All this time , Mr. Giles , with the white nightcap on , have be sit on the step of the chaise , support an elbow on each knee , and wipe his eye with a blue cotton pocket-handkerchief dot with white spot .
That the honest fellow have not be feign emotion , be abundantly demonstrate by the very red eye with which he regard the young gentleman , when he turn round and address him .
“ I think you have good go on to my mother ’ s in the chaise , Giles , ” say he .
“ I would rather walk slowly on , so a to gain a little time before I see her .
You can say I be coming. ” “ I beg your pardon , Mr. Harry , ” say Giles : give a final polish to his ruffled countenance with the handkerchief ; “ but if you would leave the postboy to say that , I should be very much oblige to you .
It wouldn ’ t be proper for the maid to see me in this state , sir ; I should never have any more authority with them if they did. ” “ Well , ” rejoin Harry Maylie , smile , “ you can do a you like .
Let him go on with the luggage , if you wish it , and do you follow with u .
Only first exchange that nightcap for some more appropriate covering , or we shall be take for madmen. ” Mr. Giles , remind of his unbecoming costume , snatch off and pocket his nightcap ; and substitute a hat , of grave and sober shape , which he take out of the chaise .
This do , the postboy drive off ; Giles , Mr. Maylie , and Oliver , follow at their leisure .
As they walk along , Oliver glance from time to time with much interest and curiosity at the new comer .
He seem about five-and-twenty year of age , and be of the middle height ; his countenance be frank and handsome ; and his demeanor easy and prepossessing .
Notwithstanding the difference between youth and age , he bore so strong a likeness to the old lady , that Oliver would have have no great difficulty in imagine their relationship , if he have not already speak of her a his mother .
Mrs. Maylie be anxiously wait to receive her son when he reach the cottage .
The meeting do not take place without great emotion on both side .
“ Mother ! ” whisper the young man ; “ why do you not write before ? ” “ I do , ” reply Mrs. Maylie ; “ but , on reflection , I determine to keep back the letter until I have hear Mr. Losberne ’ s opinion. ” “ But why , ” say the young man , “ why run the chance of that occur which so nearly happen ?
If Rose had—I can not utter that word now—if this illness have terminate differently , how could you ever have forgive yourself !
How could I ever have know happiness again ! ” “ If that _had_ be the case , Harry , ” say Mrs. Maylie , “ I fear your happiness would have be effectually blight , and that your arrival here , a day sooner or a day later , would have be of very , very little import. ” “ And who can wonder if it be so , mother ? ” rejoin the young man ; “ or why should I say , _if_ ? —It is—it is—you know it , mother—you must know it ! ” “ I know that she deserve the best and pure love the heart of man can offer , ” say Mrs. Maylie ; “ I know that the devotion and affection of her nature require no ordinary return , but one that shall be deep and lasting .
If I do not feel this , and know , besides , that a change behaviour in one she love would break her heart , I should not feel my task so difficult of performance , or have to encounter so many struggle in my own bosom , when I take what seem to me to be the strict line of duty. ” “ This be unkind , mother , ” say Harry .
“ Do you still suppose that I be a boy ignorant of my own mind , and mistake the impulse of my own soul ? ” “ I think , my dear son , ” return Mrs. Maylie , lay her hand upon his shoulder , “ that youth have many generous impulse which do not last ; and that among them be some , which , be gratify , become only the more fleeting .
Above all , I think ” say the lady , fix her eye on her son ’ s face , “ that if an enthusiastic , ardent , and ambitious man marry a wife on whose name there be a stain , which , though it originate in no fault of hers , may be visit by cold and sordid people upon her , and upon his child also : and , in exact proportion to his success in the world , be cast in his teeth , and make the subject of sneer against him : he may , no matter how generous and good his nature , one day repent of the connection he form in early life .
And she may have the pain of know that he do so. ” “ Mother , ” say the young man , impatiently , “ he would be a selfish brute , unworthy alike of the name of man and of the woman you describe , who act thus. ” “ You think so now , Harry , ” reply his mother .
“ And ever will ! ” say the young man .
“ The mental agony I have suffer , during the last two day , wring from me the avowal to you of a passion which , a you well know , be not one of yesterday , nor one I have lightly form .
On Rose , sweet , gentle girl !
my heart be set , as firmly a ever heart of man be set on woman .
I have no thought , no view , no hope in life , beyond her ; and if you oppose me in this great stake , you take my peace and happiness in your hand , and cast them to the wind .
Mother , think good of this , and of me , and do not disregard the happiness of which you seem to think so little. ” “ Harry , ” say Mrs. Maylie , “ it be because I think so much of warm and sensitive heart , that I would spare them from be wound .
But we have say enough , and more than enough , on this matter , just now. ” “ Let it rest with Rose , then , ” interpose Harry .
“ You will not press these overstrained opinion of yours , so far , a to throw any obstacle in my way ? ” “ I will not , ” rejoin Mrs. Maylie ; “ but I would have you consider— ” “ I _have_ consider ! ” be the impatient reply ; “ Mother , I have consider , year and year .
I have consider , ever since I have be capable of serious reflection .
My feeling remain unchanged , a they ever will ; and why should I suffer the pain of a delay in give them vent , which can be productive of no earthly good ?
No !
Before I leave this place , Rose shall hear me. ” “ She shall , ” say Mrs. Maylie .
“ There be something in your manner , which would almost imply that she will hear me coldly , mother , ” say the young man .
“ Not coldly , ” rejoin the old lady ; “ far from it. ” “ How then ? ” urge the young man .
“ She have form no other attachment ? ” “ No , indeed , ” reply his mother ; “ you have , or I mistake , too strong a hold on her affection already .
What I would say , ” resume the old lady , stop her son a he be about to speak , “ be this .
Before you stake your all on this chance ; before you suffer yourself to be carry to the high point of hope ; reflect for a few moment , my dear child , on Rose ’ s history , and consider what effect the knowledge of her doubtful birth may have on her decision : devote a she be to u , with all the intensity of her noble mind , and with that perfect sacrifice of self which , in all matter , great or trifling , have always be her characteristic. ” “ What do you mean ? ” “ That I leave you to discover , ” reply Mrs. Maylie .
“ I must go back to her .
God bless you ! ” “ I shall see you again to-night ? ” say the young man , eagerly .
“ By and by , ” reply the lady ; “ when I leave Rose. ” “ You will tell her I be here ? ” say Harry .
“ Of course , ” reply Mrs. Maylie .
“ And say how anxious I have be , and how much I have suffer , and how I long to see her .
You will not refuse to do this , mother ? ” “ No , ” say the old lady ; “ I will tell her all. ” And press her son ’ s hand , affectionately , she hasten from the room .
Mr. Losberne and Oliver have remain at another end of the apartment while this hurried conversation be proceed .
The former now hold out his hand to Harry Maylie ; and hearty salutation be exchange between them .
The doctor then communicate , in reply to multifarious question from his young friend , a precise account of his patient ’ s situation ; which be quite a consolatory and full of promise , a Oliver ’ s statement have encourage him to hope ; and to the whole of which , Mr. Giles , who affect to be busy about the luggage , listen with greedy ear .
“ Have you shoot anything particular , lately , Giles ? ” inquire the doctor , when he have conclude .
“ Nothing particular , sir , ” reply Mr. Giles , colour up to the eye .
“ Nor catch any thief , nor identify any house-breakers ? ” say the doctor .
“ None at all , sir , ” reply Mr. Giles , with much gravity .
“ Well , ” say the doctor , “ I be sorry to hear it , because you do that sort of thing admirably .
Pray , how be Brittles ? ” “ The boy be very well , sir , ” say Mr. Giles , recover his usual tone of patronage ; “ and send his respectful duty , sir. ” “ That ’ s well , ” say the doctor .
“ Seeing you here , remind me , Mr. Giles , that on the day before that on which I be call away so hurriedly , I execute , at the request of your good mistress , a small commission in your favour .
Just step into this corner a moment , will you ? ” Mr. Giles walk into the corner with much importance , and some wonder , and be honour with a short whispering conference with the doctor , on the termination of which , he make a great many bow , and retire with step of unusual stateliness .
The subject matter of this conference be not disclose in the parlour , but the kitchen be speedily enlighten concern it ; for Mr. Giles walk straight thither , and have call for a mug of ale , announce , with an air of majesty , which be highly effective , that it have please his mistress , in consideration of his gallant behaviour on the occasion of that attempted robbery , to deposit , in the local savings-bank , the sum of five-and-twenty pound , for his sole use and benefit .
At this , the two women-servants lift up their hand and eye , and suppose that Mr. Giles , pull out his shirt-frill , reply , “ No , no ” ; and that if they observe that he be at all haughty to his inferior , he would thank them to tell him so .
And then he make a great many other remark , no less illustrative of his humility , which be receive with equal favour and applause , and be , withal , a original and as much to the purpose , a the remark of great men commonly be .
Above stair , the remainder of the evening pass cheerfully away ; for the doctor be in high spirit ; and however fatigue or thoughtful Harry Maylie might have be at first , he be not proof against the worthy gentleman ’ s good humour , which display itself in a great variety of sally and professional recollection , and an abundance of small joke , which strike Oliver a be the droll thing he have ever hear , and cause him to laugh proportionately ; to the evident satisfaction of the doctor , who laugh immoderately at himself , and make Harry laugh almost a heartily , by the very force of sympathy .
So , they be a pleasant a party a , under the circumstance , they could well have be ; and it be late before they retire , with light and thankful heart , to take that rest of which , after the doubt and suspense they have recently undergo , they stand much in need .
Oliver rise next morning , in good heart , and go about his usual occupation , with more hope and pleasure than he have know for many day .
The bird be once more hung out , to sing , in their old place ; and the sweet wild flower that could be find , be once more gathered to gladden Rose with their beauty .
The melancholy which have seem to the sad eye of the anxious boy to hang , for day past , over every object , beautiful a all be , be dispel by magic .
The dew seem to sparkle more brightly on the green leave ; the air to rustle among them with a sweeter music ; and the sky itself to look more blue and bright .
Such be the influence which the condition of our own thought , exercise , even over the appearance of external object .
Men who look on nature , and their fellow-men , and cry that all be dark and gloomy , be in the right ; but the sombre colour be reflection from their own jaundiced eye and heart .
The real hue be delicate , and need a clear vision .
It be worthy of remark , and Oliver do not fail to note it at the time , that his morning expedition be no long make alone .
Harry Maylie , after the very first morning when he meet Oliver come laden home , be seize with such a passion for flower , and display such a taste in their arrangement , a leave his young companion far behind .
If Oliver be behindhand in these respect , he know where the best be to be find ; and morning after morning they scour the country together , and bring home the fair that blossom .
The window of the young lady ’ s chamber be open now ; for she love to feel the rich summer air stream in , and revive her with it freshness ; but there always stand in water , just inside the lattice , one particular little bunch , which be make up with great care , every morning .
Oliver could not help notice that the withered flower be never throw away , although the little vase be regularly replenish ; nor , could he help observing , that whenever the doctor come into the garden , he invariably cast his eye up to that particular corner , and nod his head most expressively , a he set forth on his morning ’ s walk .
Pending these observation , the day be fly by ; and Rose be rapidly recover .
Nor do Oliver ’ s time hang heavy on his hand , although the young lady have not yet leave her chamber , and there be no evening walk , save now and then , for a short distance , with Mrs. Maylie .
He apply himself , with redoubled assiduity , to the instruction of the white-headed old gentleman , and labour so hard that his quick progress surprise even himself .
It be while he be engage in this pursuit , that he be greatly startle and distress by a most unexpected occurrence .
The little room in which he be accustom to sit , when busy at his book , be on the ground-floor , at the back of the house .
It be quite a cottage-room , with a lattice-window : around which be cluster of jessamine and honeysuckle , that creep over the casement , and fill the place with their delicious perfume .
It look into a garden , whence a wicket-gate open into a small paddock ; all beyond , be fine meadow-land and wood .
There be no other dwell near , in that direction ; and the prospect it command be very extensive .
One beautiful evening , when the first shade of twilight be begin to settle upon the earth , Oliver sit at this window , intent upon his book .
He have be pore over them for some time ; and , a the day have be uncommonly sultry , and he have exert himself a great deal , it be no disparagement to the author , whoever they may have be , to say , that gradually and by slow degree , he fell asleep .
There be a kind of sleep that steal upon u sometimes , which , while it hold the body prisoner , do not free the mind from a sense of thing about it , and enable it to ramble at it pleasure .
So far a an overpower heaviness , a prostration of strength , and an utter inability to control our thought or power of motion , can be call sleep , this be it ; and yet , we have a consciousness of all that be go on about u , and , if we dream at such a time , word which be really spoken , or sound which really exist at the moment , accommodate themselves with surprising readiness to our vision , until reality and imagination become so strangely blend that it be afterwards almost matter of impossibility to separate the two .
Nor be this , the most striking phenomenon incidental to such a state .
It be an undoubted fact , that although our sens of touch and sight be for the time dead , yet our sleep thought , and the visionary scene that pass before u , will be influence and materially influence , by the _mere silent presence_ of some external object ; which may not have be near u when we close our eye : and of whose vicinity we have have no wake consciousness .
Oliver know , perfectly well , that he be in his own little room ; that his book be lie on the table before him ; that the sweet air be stir among the creep plant outside .
And yet he be asleep .
Suddenly , the scene change ; the air become close and confine ; and he think , with a glow of terror , that he be in the Jew ’ s house again .
There sit the hideous old man , in his accustomed corner , point at him , and whisper to another man , with his face avert , who sit beside him .
“ Hush , my dear ! ” he think he hear the Jew say ; “ it be he , sure enough .
Come away. ” “ He ! ” the other man seem to answer ; “ could I mistake him , think you ?
If a crowd of ghost be to put themselves into his exact shape , and he stand amongst them , there be something that would tell me how to point him out .
If you bury him fifty foot deep , and take me across his grave , I fancy I should know , if there wasn ’ t a mark above it , that he lay bury there ? ” The man seem to say this , with such dreadful hatred , that Oliver awake with the fear , and start up .
Good Heaven !
what be that , which send the blood tingle to his heart , and deprive him of his voice , and of power to move !
There—there—at the window—close before him—so close , that he could have almost touch him before he start back : with his eye peer into the room , and meet his : there stand the Jew !
And beside him , white with rage or fear , or both , be the scowl feature of the man who have accost him in the inn-yard .
It be but an instant , a glance , a flash , before his eye ; and they be go .
But they have recognise him , and he them ; and their look be a firmly impress upon his memory , a if it have be deeply carve in stone , and set before him from his birth .
He stand transfixed for a moment ; then , leap from the window into the garden , call loudly for help .
CHAPTER XXXV .
CONTAINING THE UNSATISFACTORY RESULT OF OLIVER ’ S ADVENTURE ; AND A CONVERSATION OF SOME IMPORTANCE BETWEEN HARRY MAYLIE AND ROSE When the inmate of the house , attract by Oliver ’ s cry , hurry to the spot from which they proceed , they find him , pale and agitate , point in the direction of the meadow behind the house , and scarcely able to articulate the word , “ The Jew !
the Jew ! ” Mr. Giles be at a loss to comprehend what this outcry meant ; but Harry Maylie , whose perception be something quicker , and who have hear Oliver ’ s history from his mother , understand it at once .
“ What direction do he take ? ” he ask , catch up a heavy stick which be stand in a corner .
“ That , ” reply Oliver , point out the course the man have take ; “ I miss them in an instant. ” “ Then , they be in the ditch ! ” say Harry .
“ Follow !
And keep a near me , a you can. ” So say , he spring over the hedge , and dart off with a speed which render it matter of exceed difficulty for the others to keep near him .
Giles follow as well a he could ; and Oliver follow too ; and in the course of a minute or two , Mr. Losberne , who have be out walking , and just then return , tumble over the hedge after them , and pick himself up with more agility than he could have be suppose to possess , strike into the same course at no contemptible speed , shout all the while , most prodigiously , to know what be the matter .
On they all go ; nor stop they once to breathe , until the leader , strike off into an angle of the field indicate by Oliver , begin to search , narrowly , the ditch and hedge adjoining ; which afford time for the remainder of the party to come up ; and for Oliver to communicate to Mr. Losberne the circumstance that have lead to so vigorous a pursuit .
The search be all in vain .
There be not even the trace of recent footstep , to be see .
They stand now , on the summit of a little hill , command the open field in every direction for three or four mile .
There be the village in the hollow on the left ; but , in order to gain that , after pursue the track Oliver have point out , the men must have make a circuit of open ground , which it be impossible they could have accomplish in so short a time .
A thick wood skirt the meadow-land in another direction ; but they could not have gain that covert for the same reason .
“ It must have be a dream , Oliver , ” say Harry Maylie .
“ Oh no , indeed , sir , ” reply Oliver , shudder at the very recollection of the old wretch ’ s countenance ; “ I saw him too plainly for that .
I saw them both , as plainly a I see you now. ” “ Who be the other ? ” inquire Harry and Mr. Losberne , together .
“ The very same man I tell you of , who come so suddenly upon me at the inn , ” say Oliver .
“ We have our eye fix full upon each other ; and I could swear to him. ” “ They take this way ? ” demand Harry : “ be you sure ? ” “ As I be that the men be at the window , ” reply Oliver , point down , a he speak , to the hedge which divide the cottage-garden from the meadow .
“ The tall man leap over , just there ; and the Jew , run a few pace to the right , creep through that gap. ” The two gentleman watch Oliver ’ s earnest face , a he speak , and look from him to each other , seem to feel satisfied of the accuracy of what he say .
Still , in no direction be there any appearance of the trampling of men in hurried flight .
The grass be long ; but it be trodden down nowhere , save where their own foot have crush it .
The side and brink of the ditch be of damp clay ; but in no one place could they discern the print of men ’ s shoe , or the slight mark which would indicate that any foot have press the ground for hour before .
“ This be strange ! ” say Harry .
“ Strange ? ” echo the doctor .
“ Blathers and Duff , themselves , could make nothing of it. ” Notwithstanding the evidently useless nature of their search , they do not desist until the come on of night render it further prosecution hopeless ; and even then , they give it up with reluctance .
Giles be dispatch to the different ale-houses in the village , furnish with the best description Oliver could give of the appearance and dress of the stranger .
Of these , the Jew be , at all event , sufficiently remarkable to be remember , suppose he have be see drinking , or loiter about ; but Giles return without any intelligence , calculate to dispel or lessen the mystery .
On the next day , fresh search be make , and the inquiry renew ; but with no good success .
On the day follow , Oliver and Mr. Maylie repair to the market-town , in the hope of see or hear something of the men there ; but this effort be equally fruitless .
After a few day , the affair begin to be forget , a most affair be , when wonder , have no fresh food to support it , die away of itself .
Meanwhile , Rose be rapidly recover .
She have leave her room : be able to go out ; and mix once more with the family , carry joy into the heart of all .
But , although this happy change have a visible effect on the little circle ; and although cheerful voice and merry laughter be once more heard in the cottage ; there be at time , an unwonted restraint upon some there : even upon Rose herself : which Oliver could not fail to remark .
Mrs. Maylie and her son be often closet together for a long time ; and more than once Rose appear with trace of tear upon her face .
After Mr. Losberne have fix a day for his departure to Chertsey , these symptom increase ; and it become evident that something be in progress which affect the peace of the young lady , and of somebody else besides .
At length , one morning , when Rose be alone in the breakfast-parlour , Harry Maylie enter ; and , with some hesitation , beg permission to speak with her for a few moment .
“ A few—a very few—will suffice , Rose , ” say the young man , draw his chair towards her .
“ What I shall have to say , have already present itself to your mind ; the most cherished hope of my heart be not unknown to you , though from my lip you have not hear them stated. ” Rose have be very pale from the moment of his entrance ; but that might have be the effect of her recent illness .
She merely bow ; and bending over some plant that stand near , wait in silence for him to proceed .
“ I—I—ought to have leave here , before , ” say Harry .
“ You should , indeed , ” reply Rose .
“ Forgive me for say so , but I wish you had. ” “ I be bring here , by the most dreadful and agonising of all apprehension , ” say the young man ; “ the fear of lose the one dear be on whom my every wish and hope be fix .
You have be die ; tremble between earth and heaven .
We know that when the young , the beautiful , and good , be visit with sickness , their pure spirit insensibly turn towards their bright home of last rest ; we know , Heaven help u !
that the best and fair of our kind , too often fade in blooming. ” There be tear in the eye of the gentle girl , a these word be speak ; and when one fell upon the flower over which she bend , and glisten brightly in it cup , make it more beautiful , it seem a though the outpouring of her fresh young heart , claim kindred naturally , with the lovely thing in nature .
“ A creature , ” continue the young man , passionately , “ a creature a fair and innocent of guile a one of God ’ s own angel , flutter between life and death .
Oh !
who could hope , when the distant world to which she be akin , half open to her view , that she would return to the sorrow and calamity of this !
Rose , Rose , to know that you be pass away like some soft shadow , which a light from above , cast upon the earth ; to have no hope that you would be spar to those who linger here ; hardly to know a reason why you should be ; to feel that you belong to that bright sphere whither so many of the fair and the best have wing their early flight ; and yet to pray , amid all these consolation , that you might be restore to those who love you—these be distraction almost too great to bear .
They be mine , by day and night ; and with them , come such a rush torrent of fear , and apprehension , and selfish regret , l you should die , and never know how devotedly I love you , a almost bore down sense and reason in it course .
You recover .
Day by day , and almost hour by hour , some drop of health come back , and mingle with the spent and feeble stream of life which circulate languidly within you , swell it again to a high and rush tide .
I have watch you change almost from death , to life , with eye that turn blind with their eagerness and deep affection .
Do not tell me that you wish I have lose this ; for it have soften my heart to all mankind. ” “ I do not mean that , ” say Rose , weep ; “ I only wish you have leave here , that you might have turn to high and noble pursuit again ; to pursuit well worthy of you. ” “ There be no pursuit more worthy of me : more worthy of the high nature that exist : than the struggle to win such a heart a yours , ” say the young man , take her hand .
“ Rose , my own dear Rose !
For years—for years—I have love you ; hop to win my way to fame , and then come proudly home and tell you it have be pursue only for you to share ; thinking , in my daydream , how I would remind you , in that happy moment , of the many silent token I have give of a boy ’ s attachment , and claim your hand , a in redemption of some old mute contract that have be seal between u !
That time have not arrive ; but here , with not fame win , and no young vision realise , I offer you the heart so long your own , and stake my all upon the word with which you greet the offer. ” “ Your behaviour have ever be kind and noble. ” say Rose , master the emotion by which she be agitate .
“ As you believe that I be not insensible or ungrateful , so hear my answer. ” “ It be , that I may endeavour to deserve you ; it be , dear Rose ? ” “ It be , ” reply Rose , “ that you must endeavour to forget me ; not a your old and dearly-attached companion , for that would wind me deeply ; but , a the object of your love .
Look into the world ; think how many heart you would be proud to gain , be there .
Confide some other passion to me , if you will ; I will be the true , warm , and most faithful friend you have. ” There be a pause , during which , Rose , who have cover her face with one hand , give free vent to her tear .
Harry still retain the other .
“ And your reason , Rose , ” he say , at length , in a low voice ; “ your reason for this decision ? ” “ You have a right to know them , ” rejoin Rose .
“ You can say nothing to alter my resolution .
It be a duty that I must perform .
I owe it , alike to others , and to myself. ” “ To yourself ? ” “ Yes , Harry .
I owe it to myself , that I , a friendless , portionless , girl , with a blight upon my name , should not give your friend reason to suspect that I have sordidly yield to your first passion , and fasten myself , a clog , on all your hope and project .
I owe it to you and yours , to prevent you from oppose , in the warmth of your generous nature , this great obstacle to your progress in the world. ” “ If your inclination chime with your sense of duty— ” Harry begin .
“ They do not , ” reply Rose , colour deeply .
“ Then you return my love ? ” say Harry .
“ Say but that , dear Rose ; say but that ; and soften the bitterness of this hard disappointment ! ” “ If I could have do so , without do heavy wrong to him I love , ” rejoin Rose , “ I could have— ” “ Have receive this declaration very differently ? ” say Harry .
“ Do not conceal that from me , at least , Rose. ” “ I could , ” say Rose .
“ Stay ! ” she add , disengage her hand , “ why should we prolong this painful interview ?
Most painful to me , and yet productive of last happiness , notwithstanding ; for it _will_ be happiness to know that I once hold the high place in your regard which I now occupy , and every triumph you achieve in life will animate me with new fortitude and firmness .
Farewell , Harry !
As we have meet to-day , we meet no more ; but in other relation than those in which this conversation have place u , we may be long and happily entwine ; and may every blessing that the prayer of a true and earnest heart can call down from the source of all truth and sincerity , cheer and prosper you ! ” “ Another word , Rose , ” say Harry .
“ Your reason in your own word .
From your own lip , let me hear it ! ” “ The prospect before you , ” answer Rose , firmly , “ be a brilliant one .
All the honour to which great talent and powerful connection can help men in public life , be in store for you .
But those connection be proud ; and I will neither mingle with such a may hold in scorn the mother who give me life ; nor bring disgrace or failure on the son of her who have so well supply that mother ’ s place .
In a word , ” say the young lady , turn away , a her temporary firmness forsook her , “ there be a stain upon my name , which the world visit on innocent head .
I will carry it into no blood but my own ; and the reproach shall rest alone on me. ” “ One word more , Rose .
Dearest Rose !
one more ! ” cry Harry , throw himself before her .
“ If I have be less—less fortunate , the world would call it—if some obscure and peaceful life have be my destiny—if I have be poor , sick , helpless—would you have turn from me then ?
Or have my probable advancement to rich and honour , give this scruple birth ? ” “ Do not press me to reply , ” answer Rose .
“ The question do not arise , and never will .
It be unfair , almost unkind , to urge it. ” “ If your answer be what I almost dare to hope it be , ” retort Harry , “ it will shed a gleam of happiness upon my lonely way , and light the path before me .
It be not an idle thing to do so much , by the utterance of a few brief word , for one who love you beyond all else .
Oh , Rose : in the name of my ardent and endure attachment ; in the name of all I have suffer for you , and all you doom me to undergo ; answer me this one question ! ” “ Then , if your lot have be differently cast , ” rejoin Rose ; “ if you have be even a little , but not so far , above me ; if I could have be a help and comfort to you in any humble scene of peace and retirement , and not a blot and drawback in ambitious and distinguished crowd ; I should have be spar this trial .
I have every reason to be happy , very happy , now ; but then , Harry , I own I should have be happier. ” Busy recollection of old hope , cherish a a girl , long ago , crowd into the mind of Rose , while make this avowal ; but they bring tear with them , a old hope will when they come back wither ; and they relieve her .
“ I can not help this weakness , and it make my purpose strong , ” say Rose , extend her hand .
“ I must leave you now , indeed. ” “ I ask one promise , ” say Harry .
“ Once , and only once more , —say within a year , but it may be much sooner , —I may speak to you again on this subject , for the last time. ” “ Not to press me to alter my right determination , ” reply Rose , with a melancholy smile ; “ it will be useless. ” “ No , ” say Harry ; “ to hear you repeat it , if you will—finally repeat it !
I will lay at your foot , whatever of station of fortune I may possess ; and if you still adhere to your present resolution , will not seek , by word or act , to change it. ” “ Then let it be so , ” rejoin Rose ; “ it be but one pang the more , and by that time I may be enable to bear it better. ” She extend her hand again .
But the young man catch her to his bosom ; and imprint one kiss on her beautiful forehead , hurry from the room .
CHAPTER XXXVI .
IS A VERY SHORT ONE , AND MAY APPEAR OF NO GREAT IMPORTANCE IN ITS PLACE , BUT IT SHOULD BE READ NOTWITHSTANDING , AS A SEQUEL TO THE LAST , AND A KEY TO ONE THAT WILL FOLLOW WHEN ITS TIME ARRIVES “ And so you be resolve to be my travel companion this morning ; eh ? ” say the doctor , a Harry Maylie join him and Oliver at the breakfast-table .
“ Why , you be not in the same mind or intention two half-hours together ! ” “ You will tell me a different tale one of these day , ” say Harry , colour without any perceptible reason .
“ I hope I may have good cause to do so , ” reply Mr. Losberne ; “ though I confess I don ’ t think I shall .
But yesterday morning you have make up your mind , in a great hurry , to stay here , and to accompany your mother , like a dutiful son , to the sea-side .
Before noon , you announce that you be go to do me the honour of accompany me as far a I go , on your road to London .
And at night , you urge me , with great mystery , to start before the lady be stir ; the consequence of which be , that young Oliver here be pin down to his breakfast when he ought to be range the meadow after botanical phenomenon of all kind .
Too bad , isn ’ t it , Oliver ? ” “ I should have be very sorry not to have be at home when you and Mr. Maylie go away , sir , ” rejoin Oliver .
“ That ’ s a fine fellow , ” say the doctor ; “ you shall come and see me when you return .
But , to speak seriously , Harry ; have any communication from the great nob produce this sudden anxiety on your part to be go ? ” “ The great nob , ” reply Harry , “ under which designation , I presume , you include my most stately uncle , have not communicate with me at all , since I have be here ; nor , at this time of the year , be it likely that anything would occur to render necessary my immediate attendance among them. ” “ Well , ” say the doctor , “ you be a queer fellow .
But of course they will get you into parliament at the election before Christmas , and these sudden shifting and change be no bad preparation for political life .
There ’ s something in that .
Good training be always desirable , whether the race be for place , cup , or sweepstakes. ” Harry Maylie look a if he could have follow up this short dialogue by one or two remark that would have stagger the doctor not a little ; but he content himself with say , “ We shall see , ” and pursue the subject no farther .
The post-chaise drive up to the door shortly afterwards ; and Giles come in for the luggage , the good doctor bustle out , to see it pack .
“ Oliver , ” say Harry Maylie , in a low voice , “ let me speak a word with you. ” Oliver walk into the window-recess to which Mr. Maylie beckon him ; much surprise at the mixture of sadness and boisterous spirit , which his whole behaviour displayed .
“ You can write well now ? ” say Harry , lay his hand upon his arm .
“ I hope so , sir , ” reply Oliver .
“ I shall not be at home again , perhaps for some time ; I wish you would write to me—say once a fort-night : every alternate Monday : to the General Post Office in London .
Will you ? ” “ Oh !
certainly , sir ; I shall be proud to do it , ” exclaim Oliver , greatly delight with the commission .
“ I should like to know how—how my mother and Miss Maylie be , ” say the young man ; “ and you can fill up a sheet by tell me what walk you take , and what you talk about , and whether she—they , I mean—seem happy and quite well .
You understand me ? ” “ Oh !
quite , sir , quite , ” reply Oliver .
“ I would rather you do not mention it to them , ” say Harry , hurry over his word ; “ because it might make my mother anxious to write to me oftener , and it be a trouble and worry to her .
Let it be a secret between you and me ; and mind you tell me everything !
I depend upon you. ” Oliver , quite elate and honour by a sense of his importance , faithfully promise to be secret and explicit in his communication .
Mr. Maylie take leave of him , with many assurance of his regard and protection .
The doctor be in the chaise ; Giles ( who , it have be arrange , should be leave behind ) hold the door open in his hand ; and the women-servants be in the garden , look on .
Harry cast one slight glance at the latticed window , and jump into the carriage .
“ Drive on ! ” he cry , “ hard , fast , full gallop !
Nothing short of fly will keep pace with me , to-day. ” “ Halloa ! ” cry the doctor , let down the front glass in a great hurry , and shout to the postillion ; “ something very short of fly will keep pace with _me_ .
Do you hear ? ” Jingling and clattering , till distance render it noise inaudible , and it rapid progress only perceptible to the eye , the vehicle wind it way along the road , almost hide in a cloud of dust : now wholly disappear , and now become visible again , a intervening object , or the intricacy of the way , permit .
It be not until even the dusty cloud be no long to be see , that the gazers disperse .
And there be one looker-on , who remain with eye fix upon the spot where the carriage have disappear , long after it be many mile away ; for , behind the white curtain which have shroud her from view when Harry raise his eye towards the window , sit Rose herself .
“ He seem in high spirit and happy , ” she say , at length .
“ I fear for a time he might be otherwise .
I be mistake .
I be very , very glad. ” Tears be sign of gladness as well a grief ; but those which course down Rose ’ s face , a she sit pensively at the window , still gaze in the same direction , seem to tell more of sorrow than of joy .
CHAPTER XXXVII .
IN WHICH THE READER MAY PERCEIVE A CONTRAST , NOT UNCOMMON IN MATRIMONIAL CASES Mr. Bumble sit in the workhouse parlour , with his eye moodily fix on the cheerless grate , whence , a it be summer time , no brighter gleam proceed , than the reflection of certain sickly ray of the sun , which be send back from it cold and shin surface .
A paper fly-cage dangle from the ceiling , to which he occasionally raise his eye in gloomy thought ; and , a the heedless insect hover round the gaudy net-work , Mr. Bumble would heave a deep sigh , while a more gloomy shadow overspread his countenance .
Mr. Bumble be meditate ; it might be that the insect bring to mind , some painful passage in his own past life .
Nor be Mr. Bumble ’ s gloom the only thing calculate to awaken a pleasing melancholy in the bosom of a spectator .
There be not want other appearance , and those closely connect with his own person , which announce that a great change have take place in the position of his affair .
The laced coat , and the cocked hat ; where be they ?
He still wear knee-breeches , and dark cotton stocking on his nether limb ; but they be not _the_ breech .
The coat be wide-skirted ; and in that respect like _the_ coat , but , oh how different !
The mighty cock hat be replace by a modest round one .
Mr. Bumble be no long a beadle .
There be some promotion in life , which , independent of the more substantial reward they offer , require peculiar value and dignity from the coat and waistcoat connect with them .
A field-marshal have his uniform ; a bishop his silk apron ; a counsellor his silk gown ; a beadle his cock hat .
Strip the bishop of his apron , or the beadle of his hat and lace ; what be they ?
Men .
Mere men .
Dignity , and even holiness too , sometimes , be more question of coat and waistcoat than some people imagine .
Mr. Bumble have marry Mrs. Corney , and be master of the workhouse .
Another beadle have come into power .
On him the cocked hat , gold-laced coat , and staff , have all three descend .
“ And to-morrow two month it be do ! ” say Mr. Bumble , with a sigh .
“ It seem a age. ” Mr. Bumble might have mean that he have concentrate a whole existence of happiness into the short space of eight week ; but the sigh—there be a vast deal of meaning in the sigh .
“ I sell myself , ” say Mr. Bumble , pursue the same train of relection , “ for six teaspoon , a pair of sugar-tongs , and a milk-pot ; with a small quantity of second-hand furniture , and twenty pound in money .
I go very reasonable .
Cheap , dirt cheap ! ” “ Cheap ! ” cry a shrill voice in Mr. Bumble ’ s ear : “ you would have be dear at any price ; and dear enough I pay for you , Lord above know that ! ” Mr. Bumble turn , and encounter the face of his interesting consort , who , imperfectly comprehend the few word she have overheard of his complaint , have hazard the forego remark at a venture .
“ Mrs .
Bumble , ma ’ be ! ” say Mr. Bumble , with a sentimental sternness .
“ Well ! ” cry the lady .
“ Have the goodness to look at me , ” say Mr. Bumble , fix his eye upon her .
“ If she stand such a eye a that , ” say Mr. Bumble to himself , “ she can stand anything .
It be a eye I never know to fail with pauper .
If it fail with her , my power be gone. ” Whether an exceedingly small expansion of eye be sufficient to quell pauper , who , be lightly feed , be in no very high condition ; or whether the late Mrs. Corney be particularly proof against eagle glance ; be matter of opinion .
The matter of fact , be , that the matron be in no way overpower by Mr. Bumble ’ s scowl , but , on the contrary , treat it with great disdain , and even raise a laugh thereat , which sound a though it be genuine .
On hear this most unexpected sound , Mr. Bumble look , first incredulous , and afterwards amaze .
He then relapse into his former state ; nor do he rouse himself until his attention be again awaken by the voice of his partner .
“ Are you go to sit snore there , all day ? ” inquire Mrs. Bumble .
“ I be go to sit here , as long a I think proper , ma ’ be , ” rejoin Mr. Bumble ; “ and although I be _not_ snoring , I shall snore , gape , sneeze , laugh , or cry , a the humour strike me ; such be my prerogative. ” “ _Your_ prerogative ! ” sneer Mrs. Bumble , with ineffable contempt .
“ I say the word , ma ’ be , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ The prerogative of a man be to command. ” “ And what ’ s the prerogative of a woman , in the name of Goodness ? ” cry the relict of Mr. Corney decease .
“ To obey , ma ’ be , ” thunder Mr. Bumble .
“ Your late unfortunate husband should have teach it you ; and then , perhaps , he might have be alive now .
I wish he be , poor man ! ” Mrs. Bumble , see at a glance , that the decisive moment have now arrive , and that a blow struck for the mastership on one side or other , must necessarily be final and conclusive , no sooner heard this allusion to the dead and go , than she drop into a chair , and with a loud scream that Mr. Bumble be a hard-hearted brute , fell into a paroxysm of tear .
But , tear be not the thing to find their way to Mr. Bumble ’ s soul ; his heart be waterproof .
Like washable beaver hat that improve with rain , his nerve be render stouter and more vigorous , by shower of tear , which , be token of weakness , and so far tacit admission of his own power , pleased and exalt him .
He eye his good lady with look of great satisfaction , and beg , in an encouraging manner , that she should cry her hardest : the exercise be look upon , by the faculty , a strongly conducive to health .
“ It open the lung , wash the countenance , exercise the eye , and soften down the temper , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ So cry away. ” As he discharge himself of this pleasantry , Mr. Bumble take his hat from a peg , and put it on , rather rakishly , on one side , a a man might , who felt he have assert his superiority in a become manner , thrust his hand into his pocket , and saunter towards the door , with much ease and waggishness depict in his whole appearance .
Now , Mrs. Corney that be , have try the tear , because they be less troublesome than a manual assault ; but , she be quite prepared to make trial of the latter mode of proceeding , a Mr. Bumble be not long in discovering .
The first proof he experience of the fact , be convey in a hollow sound , immediately succeed by the sudden fly off of his hat to the opposite end of the room .
This preliminary proceeding lay bare his head , the expert lady , clasp him tightly round the throat with one hand , inflict a shower of blow ( dealt with singular vigour and dexterity ) upon it with the other .
This do , she create a little variety by scratch his face , and tear his hair ; and , have , by this time , inflict a much punishment a she deem necessary for the offence , she push him over a chair , which be luckily well situate for the purpose : and defy him to talk about his prerogative again , if he dare .
“ Get up ! ” say Mrs. Bumble , in a voice of command .
“ And take yourself away from here , unless you want me to do something desperate. ” Mr. Bumble rise with a very rueful countenance : wondering much what something desperate might be .
Picking up his hat , he look towards the door .
“ Are you go ? ” demand Mrs. Bumble .
“ Certainly , my dear , certainly , ” rejoin Mr. Bumble , make a quicker motion towards the door .
“ I didn ’ t intend to—I ’ m go , my dear !
You be so very violent , that really I— ” At this instant , Mrs. Bumble step hastily forward to replace the carpet , which have be kick up in the scuffle .
Mr. Bumble immediately dart out of the room , without bestow another thought on his unfinished sentence : leave the late Mrs. Corney in full possession of the field .
Mr. Bumble be fairly take by surprise , and fairly beat .
He have a decided propensity for bullying : derive no inconsiderable pleasure from the exercise of petty cruelty ; and , consequently , be ( it be needless to say ) a coward .
This be by no mean a disparagement to his character ; for many official personage , who be hold in high respect and admiration , be the victim of similar infirmity .
The remark be make , indeed , rather in his favour than otherwise , and with a view of impress the reader with a just sense of his qualification for office .
But , the measure of his degradation be not yet full .
After make a tour of the house , and thinking , for the first time , that the poor-laws really be too hard on people ; and that men who run away from their wife , leave them chargeable to the parish , ought , in justice to be visit with no punishment at all , but rather reward a meritorious individual who have suffer much ; Mr. Bumble come to a room where some of the female pauper be usually employ in wash the parish linen : when the sound of voice in conversation , now proceed .
“ Hem ! ” say Mr. Bumble , summon up all his native dignity .
“ These woman at least shall continue to respect the prerogative .
Hallo !
hallo there !
What do you mean by this noise , you hussy ? ” With these word , Mr. Bumble open the door , and walk in with a very fierce and angry manner : which be at once exchange for a most humiliated and cower air , a his eye unexpectedly rest on the form of his lady wife .
“ My dear , ” say Mr. Bumble , “ I didn ’ t know you be here. ” “ Didn ’ t know I be here ! ” repeat Mrs. Bumble .
“ What do _you_ do here ? ” “ I think they be talk rather too much to be do their work properly , my dear , ” reply Mr. Bumble : glancing distractedly at a couple of old woman at the wash-tub , who be compare note of admiration at the workhouse-master ’ s humility .
“ _You_ think they be talk too much ? ” say Mrs. Bumble .
“ What business be it of yours ? ” “ Why , my dear— ” urge Mr. Bumble submissively .
“ What business be it of yours ? ” demand Mrs. Bumble , again .
“ It ’ s very true , you ’ re matron here , my dear , ” submit Mr. Bumble ; “ but I think you mightn ’ t be in the way just then. ” “ I ’ ll tell you what , Mr. Bumble , ” return his lady .
“ We don ’ t want any of your interference .
You ’ re a great deal too fond of poke your nose into thing that don ’ t concern you , make everybody in the house laugh , the moment your back be turn , and make yourself look like a fool every hour in the day .
Be off ; come ! ” Mr. Bumble , see with excruciate feeling , the delight of the two old pauper , who be titter together most rapturously , hesitate for an instant .
Mrs. Bumble , whose patience brook no delay , catch up a bowl of soap-suds , and motion him towards the door , order him instantly to depart , on pain of receive the content upon his portly person .
What could Mr. Bumble do ?
He look dejectedly round , and slink away ; and , a he reach the door , the titterings of the pauper break into a shrill chuckle of irrepressible delight .
It want but this .
He be degrade in their eye ; he have lose caste and station before the very pauper ; he have fall from all the height and pomp of beadleship , to the low depth of the most snubbed hen-peckery .
“ All in two month ! ” say Mr. Bumble , fill with dismal thought .
“ Two month !
No more than two month ago , I be not only my own master , but everybody else ’ s , so far a the porochial workhouse be concern , and now ! — ” It be too much .
Mr. Bumble box the ear of the boy who open the gate for him ( for he have reach the portal in his reverie ) ; and walk , distractedly , into the street .
He walk up one street , and down another , until exercise have abate the first passion of his grief ; and then the revulsion of feel make him thirsty .
He pass a great many public-houses ; but , at length pause before one in a by-way , whose parlour , a he gather from a hasty peep over the blind , be desert , save by one solitary customer .
It begin to rain , heavily , at the moment .
This determine him .
Mr. Bumble step in ; and order something to drink , a he pass the bar , enter the apartment into which he have look from the street .
The man who be seat there , be tall and dark , and wear a large cloak .
He have the air of a stranger ; and seem , by a certain haggardness in his look , as well a by the dusty soil on his dress , to have travel some distance .
He eye Bumble askance , a he enter , but scarcely deign to nod his head in acknowledgment of his salutation .
Mr. Bumble have quite dignity enough for two ; suppose even that the stranger have be more familiar : so he drink his gin-and-water in silence , and read the paper with great show of pomp and circumstance .
It so happen , however : a it will happen very often , when men fall into company under such circumstance : that Mr. Bumble felt , every now and then , a powerful inducement , which he could not resist , to steal a look at the stranger : and that whenever he do so , he withdraw his eye , in some confusion , to find that the stranger be at that moment steal a look at him .
Mr. Bumble ’ s awkwardness be enhance by the very remarkable expression of the stranger ’ s eye , which be keen and bright , but shadow by a scowl of distrust and suspicion , unlike anything he have ever observe before , and repulsive to behold .
When they have encounter each other ’ s glance several time in this way , the stranger , in a harsh , deep voice , break silence .
“ Were you look for me , ” he say , “ when you peer in at the window ? ” “ Not that I be aware of , unless you ’ re Mr.— ” Here Mr. Bumble stop short ; for he be curious to know the stranger ’ s name , and think in his impatience , he might supply the blank .
“ I see you be not , ” say the stranger ; an expression of quiet sarcasm play about his mouth ; “ or you have know my name .
You don ’ t know it .
I would recommend you not to ask for it. ” “ I mean no harm , young man , ” observed Mr. Bumble , majestically .
“ And have do none , ” say the stranger .
Another silence succeed this short dialogue : which be again break by the stranger .
“ I have see you before , I think ? ” say he .
“ You be differently dress at that time , and I only pass you in the street , but I should know you again .
You be beadle here , once ; be you not ? ” “ I be , ” say Mr. Bumble , in some surprise ; “ porochial beadle. ” “ Just so , ” rejoin the other , nod his head .
“ It be in that character I saw you .
What be you now ? ” “ Master of the workhouse , ” rejoin Mr. Bumble , slowly and impressively , to check any undue familiarity the stranger might otherwise assume .
“ Master of the workhouse , young man ! ” “ You have the same eye to your own interest , that you always have , I doubt not ? ” resume the stranger , look keenly into Mr. Bumble ’ s eye , a he raise them in astonishment at the question .
“ Don ’ t scruple to answer freely , man .
I know you pretty well , you see. ” “ I suppose , a married man , ” reply Mr. Bumble , shade his eye with his hand , and survey the stranger , from head to foot , in evident perplexity , “ be not more averse to turn an honest penny when he can , than a single one .
Porochial officer be not so well pay that they can afford to refuse any little extra fee , when it come to them in a civil and proper manner. ” The stranger smile , and nod his head again : as much to say , he have not mistake his man ; then ring the bell .
“ Fill this glass again , ” he say , hand Mr. Bumble ’ s empty tumbler to the landlord .
“ Let it be strong and hot .
You like it so , I suppose ? ” “ Not too strong , ” reply Mr. Bumble , with a delicate cough .
“ You understand what that mean , landlord ! ” say the stranger , drily .
The host smile , disappear , and shortly afterwards return with a steam jorum : of which , the first gulp bring the water into Mr. Bumble ’ s eye .
“ Now listen to me , ” say the stranger , after close the door and window .
“ I come down to this place , to-day , to find you out ; and , by one of those chance which the devil throw in the way of his friend sometimes , you walk into the very room I be sit in , while you be uppermost in my mind .
I want some information from you .
I don ’ t ask you to give it for nothing , slight a it be .
Put up that , to begin with. ” As he speak , he push a couple of sovereign across the table to his companion , carefully , a though unwilling that the chinking of money should be hear without .
When Mr. Bumble have scrupulously examine the coin , to see that they be genuine , and have put them up , with much satisfaction , in his waistcoat-pocket , he go on : “ Carry your memory back—let me see—twelve year , last winter. ” “ It ’ s a long time , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ Very good .
I ’ ve do it. ” “ The scene , the workhouse. ” “ Good ! ” “ And the time , night. ” “ Yes. ” “ And the place , the crazy hole , wherever it be , in which miserable drab bring forth the life and health so often deny to themselves—gave birth to pule child for the parish to rear ; and hide their shame , rot ’ em in the grave ! ” “ The lying-in room , I suppose ? ” say Mr. Bumble , not quite follow the stranger ’ s excite description .
“ Yes , ” say the stranger .
“ A boy be bear there. ” “ A many boy , ” observe Mr. Bumble , shake his head , despondingly .
“ A murrain on the young devil ! ” cry the stranger ; “ I speak of one ; a meek-looking , pale-faced boy , who be apprentice down here , to a coffin-maker—I wish he have make his coffin , and screw his body in it—and who afterwards run away to London , a it be suppose .
“ Why , you mean Oliver !
Young Twist ! ” say Mr. Bumble ; “ I remember him , of course .
There wasn ’ t a obstinater young rascal— ” “ It ’ s not of him I want to hear ; I ’ ve heard enough of him , ” say the stranger , stop Mr. Bumble in the outset of a tirade on the subject of poor Oliver ’ s vice .
“ It ’ s of a woman ; the hag that nurse his mother .
Where be she ? ” “ Where be she ? ” say Mr. Bumble , whom the gin-and-water have render facetious .
“ It would be hard to tell .
There ’ s no midwifery there , whichever place she ’ s go to ; so I suppose she ’ s out of employment , anyway. ” “ What do you mean ? ” demand the stranger , sternly .
“ That she die last winter , ” rejoin Mr. Bumble .
The man look fixedly at him when he have give this information , and although he do not withdraw his eye for some time afterwards , his gaze gradually become vacant and abstract , and he seem lose in thought .
For some time , he appear doubtful whether he ought to be relieve or disappoint by the intelligence ; but at length he breathe more freely ; and withdraw his eye , observe that it be no great matter .
With that he rise , a if to depart .
But Mr. Bumble be cunning enough ; and he at once saw that an opportunity be open , for the lucrative disposal of some secret in the possession of his good half .
He well remember the night of old Sally ’ s death , which the occurrence of that day have give him good reason to recollect , a the occasion on which he have propose to Mrs. Corney ; and although that lady have never confide to him the disclosure of which she have be the solitary witness , he have hear enough to know that it relate to something that have occur in the old woman ’ s attendance , a workhouse nurse , upon the young mother of Oliver Twist .
Hastily call this circumstance to mind , he inform the stranger , with an air of mystery , that one woman have be closet with the old harridan shortly before she die ; and that she could , a he have reason to believe , throw some light on the subject of his inquiry .
“ How can I find her ? ” say the stranger , throw off his guard ; and plainly show that all his fear ( whatever they be ) be arouse afresh by the intelligence .
“ Only through me , ” rejoin Mr. Bumble .
“ When ? ” cry the stranger , hastily .
“ To-morrow , ” rejoin Bumble .
“ At nine in the evening , ” say the stranger , produce a scrap of paper , and write down upon it , an obscure address by the water-side , in character that betray his agitation ; “ at nine in the evening , bring her to me there .
I needn ’ t tell you to be secret .
It ’ s your interest. ” With these word , he lead the way to the door , after stop to pay for the liquor that have be drunk .
Shortly remark that their road be different , he depart , without more ceremony than an emphatic repetition of the hour of appointment for the following night .
On glance at the address , the parochial functionary observe that it contain no name .
The stranger have not go far , so he make after him to ask it .
“ What do you want ? ” cry the man , turn quickly round , a Bumble touch him on the arm .
“ Following me ? ” “ Only to ask a question , ” say the other , point to the scrap of paper .
“ What name be I to ask for ? ” “ Monks ! ” rejoin the man ; and stride hastily away .
CHAPTER XXXVIII .
CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN MR. AND MRS. BUMBLE , AND MR. MONKS , AT THEIR NOCTURNAL INTERVIEW It be a dull , close , overcast summer evening .
The cloud , which have be threaten all day , spread out in a dense and sluggish mass of vapour , already yield large drop of rain , and seem to presage a violent thunder-storm , when Mr. and Mrs. Bumble , turn out of the main street of the town , direct their course towards a scattered little colony of ruinous house , distant from it some mile and a-half , or thereabouts , and erect on a low unwholesome swamp , border upon the river .
They be both wrap in old and shabby outer garment , which might , perhaps , serve the double purpose of protect their person from the rain , and shelter them from observation .
The husband carry a lantern , from which , however , no light yet shone ; and trudge on , a few pace in front , a though—the way be dirty—to give his wife the benefit of tread in his heavy footprint .
They go on , in profound silence ; every now and then , Mr. Bumble relax his pace , and turn his head a if to make sure that his helpmate be follow ; then , discover that she be close at his heel , he mend his rate of walking , and proceed , at a considerable increase of speed , towards their place of destination .
This be far from be a place of doubtful character ; for it have long be know a the residence of none but low ruffian , who , under various pretence of living by their labour , subsist chiefly on plunder and crime .
It be a collection of mere hovel : some , hastily build with loose brick : others , of old worm-eaten ship-timber : jumble together without any attempt at order or arrangement , and plant , for the most part , within a few foot of the river ’ s bank .
A few leaky boat draw up on the mud , and make fast to the dwarf wall which skirt it : and here and there an oar or coil of rope : appear , at first , to indicate that the inhabitant of these miserable cottage pursue some avocation on the river ; but a glance at the shattered and useless condition of the article thus display , would have lead a passer-by , without much difficulty , to the conjecture that they be dispose there , rather for the preservation of appearance , than with any view to their be actually employ .
In the heart of this cluster of hut ; and skirt the river , which it upper story overhang ; stand a large building , formerly use a a manufactory of some kind .
It have , in it day , probably furnish employment to the inhabitant of the surround tenement .
But it have long since go to ruin .
The rat , the worm , and the action of the damp , have weaken and rot the pile on which it stand ; and a considerable portion of the building have already sink down into the water ; while the remainder , totter and bend over the dark stream , seem to wait a favourable opportunity of follow it old companion , and involve itself in the same fate .
It be before this ruinous building that the worthy couple pause , a the first peal of distant thunder reverberate in the air , and the rain commence pour violently down .
“ The place should be somewhere here , ” say Bumble , consult a scrap of paper he hold in his hand .
“ Halloa there ! ” cry a voice from above .
Following the sound , Mr. Bumble raise his head and descry a man look out of a door , breast-high , on the second story .
“ Stand still , a minute , ” cry the voice ; “ I ’ ll be with you directly. ” With which the head disappear , and the door close .
“ Is that the man ? ” ask Mr. Bumble ’ s good lady .
Mr. Bumble nod in the affirmative .
“ Then , mind what I tell you , ” say the matron : “ and be careful to say as little a you can , or you ’ ll betray u at once. ” Mr. Bumble , who have eye the building with very rueful look , be apparently about to express some doubt relative to the advisability of proceed any further with the enterprise just then , when he be prevent by the appearance of Monks : who open a small door , near which they stand , and beckon them inwards .
“ Come in ! ” he cry impatiently , stamp his foot upon the ground .
“ Don ’ t keep me here ! ” The woman , who have hesitate at first , walk boldly in , without any other invitation .
Mr. Bumble , who be ashamed or afraid to lag behind , follow : obviously very ill at ease and with scarcely any of that remarkable dignity which be usually his chief characteristic .
“ What the devil make you stand linger there , in the wet ? ” say Monks , turn round , and address Bumble , after he have bolt the door behind them .
“ We—we be only cool ourselves , ” stammer Bumble , look apprehensively about him .
“ Cooling yourselves ! ” retort Monks .
“ Not all the rain that ever fell , or ever will fall , will put a much of hell ’ s fire out , a a man can carry about with him .
You win ’ t cool yourself so easily ; don ’ t think it ! ” With this agreeable speech , Monks turn short upon the matron , and bend his gaze upon her , till even she , who be not easily cow , be fain to withdraw her eye , and turn them towards the ground .
“ This be the woman , be it ? ” demand Monks .
“ Hem !
That be the woman , ” reply Mr. Bumble , mindful of his wife ’ s caution .
“ You think woman never can keep secret , I suppose ? ” say the matron , interposing , and return , a she speak , the search look of Monks .
“ I know they will always keep _one_ till it ’ s find out , ” say Monks .
“ And what may that be ? ” ask the matron .
“ The loss of their own good name , ” reply Monks .
“ So , by the same rule , if a woman ’ s a party to a secret that might hang or transport her , I ’ m not afraid of her tell it to anybody ; not I !
Do you understand , mistress ? ” “ No , ” rejoin the matron , slightly colour a she speak .
“ Of course you don ’ t ! ” say Monks .
“ How should you ? ” Bestowing something half-way between a smile and a frown upon his two companion , and again beckon them to follow him , the man hasten across the apartment , which be of considerable extent , but low in the roof .
He be prepare to ascend a steep staircase , or rather ladder , lead to another floor of warehouse above : when a bright flash of lightning stream down the aperture , and a peal of thunder follow , which shake the crazy building to it centre .
“ Hear it ! ” he cry , shrink back .
“ Hear it !
Rolling and crash on a if it echo through a thousand cavern where the devil be hide from it .
I hate the sound ! ” He remain silent for a few moment ; and then , remove his hand suddenly from his face , show , to the unspeakable discomposure of Mr. Bumble , that it be much distort and discolour .
“ These fit come over me , now and then , ” say Monks , observe his alarm ; “ and thunder sometimes bring them on .
Don ’ t mind me now ; it ’ s all over for this once. ” Thus speaking , he lead the way up the ladder ; and hastily close the window-shutter of the room into which it lead , lower a lantern which hung at the end of a rope and pulley pass through one of the heavy beam in the ceiling : and which cast a dim light upon an old table and three chair that be place beneath it .
“ Now , ” say Monks , when they have all three seat themselves , “ the sooner we come to our business , the good for all .
The woman know what it be , do she ? ” The question be address to Bumble ; but his wife anticipate the reply , by intimate that she be perfectly acquaint with it .
“ He be right in say that you be with this hag the night she die ; and that she tell you something— ” “ About the mother of the boy you name , ” reply the matron interrupt him .
“ Yes. ” “ The first question be , of what nature be her communication ? ” say Monks .
“ That ’ s the second , ” observe the woman with much deliberation .
“ The first be , what may the communication be worth ? ” “ Who the devil can tell that , without know of what kind it be ? ” ask Monks .
“ Nobody well than you , I be persuade , ” answer Mrs. Bumble : who do not want for spirit , a her yoke-fellow could abundantly testify .
“ Humph ! ” say Monks significantly , and with a look of eager inquiry ; “ there may be money ’ s worth to get , eh ? ” “ Perhaps there may , ” be the composed reply .
“ Something that be take from her , ” say Monks .
“ Something that she wear .
Something that— ” “ You have good bid , ” interrupt Mrs. Bumble .
“ I have hear enough , already , to assure me that you be the man I ought to talk to. ” Mr. Bumble , who have not yet be admit by his good half into any great share of the secret than he have originally possess , listen to this dialogue with outstretched neck and distend eye : which he direct towards his wife and Monks , by turn , in undisguised astonishment ; increase , if possible , when the latter sternly demand , what sum be require for the disclosure .
“ What ’ s it worth to you ? ” ask the woman , as collectedly a before .
“ It may be nothing ; it may be twenty pound , ” reply Monks .
“ Speak out , and let me know which. ” “ Add five pound to the sum you have name ; give me five-and-twenty pound in gold , ” say the woman ; “ and I ’ ll tell you all I know .
Not before. ” “ Five-and-twenty pound ! ” exclaim Monks , draw back .
“ I speak as plainly a I could , ” reply Mrs. Bumble .
“ It ’ s not a large sum , either. ” “ Not a large sum for a paltry secret , that may be nothing when it ’ s told ! ” cry Monks impatiently ; “ and which have be lie dead for twelve year past or more ! ” “ Such matter keep well , and , like good wine , often double their value in course of time , ” answer the matron , still preserve the resolute indifference she have assume .
“ As to lie dead , there be those who will lie dead for twelve thousand year to come , or twelve million , for anything you or I know , who will tell strange tale at last ! ” “ What if I pay it for nothing ? ” ask Monks , hesitating .
“ You can easily take it away again , ” reply the matron .
“ I be but a woman ; alone here ; and unprotected. ” “ Not alone , my dear , nor unprotected , neither , ” submit Mr. Bumble , in a voice tremulous with fear : “ _I_ be here , my dear .
And besides , ” say Mr. Bumble , his teeth chattering a he speak , “ Mr .
Monks be too much of a gentleman to attempt any violence on porochial person .
Mr. Monks be aware that I be not a young man , my dear , and also that I be a little run to seed , a I may say ; bu he have heerd : I say I have no doubt Mr. Monks have heerd , my dear : that I be a very determined officer , with very uncommon strength , if I ’ m once rouse .
I only want a little rousing ; that ’ s all. ” As Mr. Bumble speak , he make a melancholy feint of grasp his lantern with fierce determination ; and plainly show , by the alarmed expression of every feature , that he _did_ want a little rousing , and not a little , prior to make any very warlike demonstration : unless , indeed , against pauper , or other person or person train down for the purpose .
“ You be a fool , ” say Mrs. Bumble , in reply ; “ and have well hold your tongue. ” “ He have well have cut it out , before he come , if he can ’ t speak in a low tone , ” say Monks , grimly .
“ So !
He ’ s your husband , eh ? ” “ He my husband ! ” titter the matron , parry the question .
“ I think as much , when you come in , ” rejoin Monks , mark the angry glance which the lady dart at her spouse a she speak .
“ So much the good ; I have less hesitation in deal with two people , when I find that there ’ s only one will between them .
I ’ m in earnest .
See here ! ” He thrust his hand into a side-pocket ; and produce a canvas bag , tell out twenty-five sovereign on the table , and push them over to the woman .
“ Now , ” he say , “ gather them up ; and when this curse peal of thunder , which I feel be come up to break over the house-top , be go , let ’ s hear your story. ” The thunder , which seem in fact much nearer , and to shiver and break almost over their head , have subside , Monks , raise his face from the table , bent forward to listen to what the woman should say .
The face of the three nearly touch , a the two men lean over the small table in their eagerness to hear , and the woman also leant forward to render her whisper audible .
The sickly ray of the suspended lantern fall directly upon them , aggravate the paleness and anxiety of their countenance : which , encircle by the deepest gloom and darkness , look ghastly in the extreme .
“ When this woman , that we call old Sally , die , ” the matron begin , “ she and I be alone. ” “ Was there no one by ? ” ask Monks , in the same hollow whisper ; “ No sick wretch or idiot in some other bed ?
No one who could hear , and might , by possibility , understand ? ” “ Not a soul , ” reply the woman ; “ we be alone .
_I_ stand alone beside the body when death come over it. ” “ Good , ” say Monks , regard her attentively .
“ Go on. ” “ She speak of a young creature , ” resume the matron , “ who have bring a child into the world some year before ; not merely in the same room , but in the same bed , in which she then lay dying. ” “ Ay ? ” say Monks , with quiver lip , and glance over his shoulder , “ Blood !
How thing come about ! ” “ The child be the one you name to him last night , ” say the matron , nod carelessly towards her husband ; “ the mother this nurse have robbed. ” “ In life ? ” ask Monks .
“ In death , ” reply the woman , with something like a shudder .
“ She steal from the corpse , when it have hardly turn to one , that which the dead mother have pray her , with her last breath , to keep for the infant ’ s sake. ” “ She sell it , ” cry Monks , with desperate eagerness ; “ do she sell it ?
Where ?
When ?
To whom ?
How long before ? ” “ As she tell me , with great difficulty , that she have do this , ” say the matron , “ she fell back and died. ” “ Without say more ? ” cry Monks , in a voice which , from it very suppression , seem only the more furious .
“ It ’ s a lie !
I ’ ll not be play with .
She say more .
I ’ ll tear the life out of you both , but I ’ ll know what it was. ” “ She didn ’ t utter another word , ” say the woman , to all appearance unmoved ( a Mr. Bumble be very far from be ) by the strange man ’ s violence ; “ but she clutch my gown , violently , with one hand , which be partly close ; and when I saw that she be dead , and so remove the hand by force , I find it clasp a scrap of dirty paper. ” “ Which contained— ” interposed Monks , stretch forward .
“ Nothing , ” reply the woman ; “ it be a pawnbroker ’ s duplicate. ” “ For what ? ” demand Monks .
“ In good time I ’ ll tell you. ” say the woman .
“ I judge that she have keep the trinket , for some time , in the hope of turn it to well account ; and then have pawn it ; and have save or scrap together money to pay the pawnbroker ’ s interest year by year , and prevent it run out ; so that if anything come of it , it could still be redeem .
Nothing have come of it ; and , a I tell you , she die with the scrap of paper , all worn and tattered , in her hand .
The time be out in two day ; I think something might one day come of it too ; and so redeem the pledge. ” “ Where be it now ? ” ask Monks quickly .
“ _There_ , ” reply the woman .
And , a if glad to be relieve of it , she hastily throw upon the table a small kid bag scarcely large enough for a French watch , which Monks pounce upon , tore open with tremble hand .
It contain a little gold locket : in which be two lock of hair , and a plain gold wedding-ring .
“ It have the word ‘ Agnes ’ engrave on the inside , ” say the woman .
“ There be a blank left for the surname ; and then follow the date ; which be within a year before the child be bear .
I find out that. ” “ And this be all ? ” say Monks , after a close and eager scrutiny of the content of the little packet .
“ All , ” reply the woman .
Mr. Bumble draw a long breath , a if he be glad to find that the story be over , and no mention make of take the five-and-twenty pound back again ; and now he take courage to wipe the perspiration which have be trickle over his nose , unchecked , during the whole of the previous dialogue .
“ I know nothing of the story , beyond what I can guess at , ” say his wife address Monks , after a short silence ; “ and I want to know nothing ; for it ’ s safe not .
But I may ask you two question , may I ? ” “ You may ask , ” say Monks , with some show of surprise ; “ but whether I answer or not be another question. ” “ —Which make three , ” observed Mr. Bumble , essay a stroke of facetiousness .
“ Is that what you expect to get from me ? ” demand the matron .
“ It be , ” reply Monks .
“ The other question ? ” “ What do you propose to do with it ?
Can it be use against me ? ” “ Never , ” rejoin Monks ; “ nor against me either .
See here !
But don ’ t move a step forward , or your life be not worth a bulrush. ” With these word , he suddenly wheel the table aside , and pull an iron ring in the boarding , throw back a large trap-door which open close at Mr. Bumble ’ s foot , and cause that gentleman to retire several pace backward , with great precipitation .
“ Look down , ” say Monks , lower the lantern into the gulf .
“ Don ’ t fear me .
I could have let you down , quietly enough , when you be seat over it , if that have be my game. ” Thus encourage , the matron draw near to the brink ; and even Mr. Bumble himself , impel by curiousity , venture to do the same .
The turbid water , swell by the heavy rain , be rush rapidly on below ; and all other sound be lose in the noise of it plashing and eddy against the green and slimy pile .
There have once be a water-mill beneath ; the tide foaming and chafe round the few rotten stake , and fragment of machinery that yet remain , seem to dart onward , with a new impulse , when freed from the obstacle which have unavailingly attempt to stem it headlong course .
“ If you fling a man ’ s body down there , where would it be to-morrow morning ? ” say Monks , swing the lantern to and fro in the dark well .
“ Twelve mile down the river , and cut to piece besides , ” reply Bumble , recoil at the thought .
Monks draw the little packet from his breast , where he have hurriedly thrust it ; and tie it to a leaden weight , which have form a part of some pulley , and be lie on the floor , drop it into the stream .
It fell straight , and true a a die ; cleave the water with a scarcely audible splash ; and be go .
The three look into each other ’ s face , seem to breathe more freely .
“ There ! ” say Monks , close the trap-door , which fell heavily back into it former position .
“ If the sea ever give up it dead , a book say it will , it will keep it gold and silver to itself , and that trash among it .
We have nothing more to say , and may break up our pleasant party. ” “ By all mean , ” observe Mr. Bumble , with great alacrity .
“ You ’ ll keep a quiet tongue in your head , will you ? ” say Monks , with a threatening look .
“ I be not afraid of your wife. ” “ You may depend upon me , young man , ” answer Mr. Bumble , bow himself gradually towards the ladder , with excessive politeness .
“ On everybody ’ s account , young man ; on my own , you know , Mr. Monks. ” “ I be glad , for your sake , to hear it , ” remarked Monks .
“ Light your lantern !
And get away from here as fast a you can. ” It be fortunate that the conversation terminate at this point , or Mr. Bumble , who have bow himself to within six inch of the ladder , would infallibly have pitch headlong into the room below .
He light his lantern from that which Monks have detach from the rope , and now carry in his hand ; and make no effort to prolong the discourse , descend in silence , follow by his wife .
Monks bring up the rear , after pause on the step to satisfy himself that there be no other sound to be hear than the beating of the rain without , and the rushing of the water .
They traverse the low room , slowly , and with caution ; for Monks start at every shadow ; and Mr. Bumble , hold his lantern a foot above the ground , walk not only with remarkable care , but with a marvellously light step for a gentleman of his figure : look nervously about him for hide trap-doors .
The gate at which they have enter , be softly unfastened and open by Monks ; merely exchange a nod with their mysterious acquaintance , the married couple emerge into the wet and darkness outside .
They be no sooner go , than Monks , who appear to entertain an invincible repugnance to be leave alone , call to a boy who have be hide somewhere below .
Bidding him go first , and bear the light , he return to the chamber he have just quit .
CHAPTER XXXIX .
INTRODUCES SOME RESPECTABLE CHARACTERS WITH WHOM THE READER IS ALREADY ACQUAINTED , AND SHOWS HOW MONKS AND THE JEW LAID THEIR WORTHY HEADS TOGETHER On the evening follow that upon which the three worthy mention in the last chapter , dispose of their little matter of business a therein narrate , Mr. William Sikes , awaken from a nap , drowsily growl forth an inquiry what time of night it be .
The room in which Mr. Sikes propound this question , be not one of those he have tenant , previous to the Chertsey expedition , although it be in the same quarter of the town , and be situate at no great distance from his former lodging .
It be not , in appearance , so desirable a habitation a his old quarter : be a mean and badly-furnished apartment , of very limited size ; light only by one small window in the shelving roof , and abut on a close and dirty lane .
Nor be there want other indication of the good gentleman ’ s have go down in the world of late : for a great scarcity of furniture , and total absence of comfort , together with the disappearance of all such small moveables a spare clothes and linen , bespeak a state of extreme poverty ; while the meagre and attenuated condition of Mr. Sikes himself would have fully confirm these symptom , if they have stand in any need of corroboration .
The housebreaker be lie on the bed , wrap in his white great-coat , by way of dressing-gown , and display a set of feature in no degree improve by the cadaverous hue of illness , and the addition of a soiled nightcap , and a stiff , black beard of a week ’ s growth .
The dog sit at the bedside : now eye his master with a wistful look , and now prick his ear , and utter a low growl a some noise in the street , or in the low part of the house , attract his attention .
Seated by the window , busily engage in patch an old waistcoat which form a portion of the robber ’ s ordinary dress , be a female : so pale and reduced with watching and privation , that there would have be considerable difficulty in recognise her a the same Nancy who have already figure in this tale , but for the voice in which she reply to Mr. Sikes ’ s question .
“ Not long go seven , ” say the girl .
“ How do you feel to-night , Bill ? ” “ As weak a water , ” reply Mr. Sikes , with an imprecation on his eye and limb .
“ Here ; lend u a hand , and let me get off this thunder bed anyhow. ” Illness have not improve Mr. Sikes ’ s temper ; for , a the girl raise him up and lead him to a chair , he mutter various curse on her awkwardness , and strike her .
“ Whining be you ? ” say Sikes .
“ Come !
Don ’ t stand snivel there .
If you can ’ t do anything good than that , cut off altogether .
D ’ ye hear me ? ” “ I hear you , ” reply the girl , turn her face aside , and force a laugh .
“ What fancy have you get in your head now ? ” “ Oh !
you ’ ve think good of it , have you ? ” growl Sikes , mark the tear which tremble in her eye .
“ All the good for you , you have. ” “ Why , you don ’ t mean to say , you ’ d be hard upon me to-night , Bill , ” say the girl , lay her hand upon his shoulder .
“ No ! ” cry Mr. Sikes .
“ Why not ? ” “ Such a number of night , ” say the girl , with a touch of woman ’ s tenderness , which communicate something like sweetness of tone , even to her voice : “ such a number of night a I ’ ve be patient with you , nurse and care for you , a if you have be a child : and this the first that I ’ ve see you like yourself ; you wouldn ’ t have serve me a you do just now , if you ’ d thought of that , would you ?
Come , come ; say you wouldn ’ t. ” “ Well , then , ” rejoin Mr. Sikes , “ I wouldn ’ t .
Why , damme , now , the girl ’ s whining again ! ” “ It ’ s nothing , ” say the girl , throw herself into a chair .
“ Don ’ t you seem to mind me .
It ’ ll soon be over. ” “ What ’ ll be over ? ” demand Mr. Sikes in a savage voice .
“ What foolery be you up to , now , again ?
Get up and bustle about , and don ’ t come over me with your woman ’ s nonsense. ” At any other time , this remonstrance , and the tone in which it be deliver , would have have the desired effect ; but the girl be really weak and exhaust , drop her head over the back of the chair , and faint , before Mr. Sikes could get out a few of the appropriate oath with which , on similar occasion , he be accustom to garnish his threat .
Not know , very well , what to do , in this uncommon emergency ; for Miss Nancy ’ s hysteric be usually of that violent kind which the patient fight and struggle out of , without much assistance ; Mr. Sikes try a little blasphemy : and find that mode of treatment wholly ineffectual , call for assistance .
“ What ’ s the matter here , my dear ? ” say Fagin , look in .
“ Lend a hand to the girl , can ’ t you ? ” reply Sikes impatiently .
“ Don ’ t stand chattering and grinning at me ! ” With an exclamation of surprise , Fagin hasten to the girl ’ s assistance , while Mr. John Dawkins ( otherwise the Artful Dodger ) , who have follow his venerable friend into the room , hastily deposit on the floor a bundle with which he be laden ; and snatch a bottle from the grasp of Master Charles Bates who come close at his heel , uncork it in a twinkling with his teeth , and pour a portion of it content down the patient ’ s throat : previously take a taste , himself , to prevent mistake .
“ Give her a whiff of fresh air with the bellow , Charley , ” say Mr. Dawkins ; “ and you slap her hand , Fagin , while Bill undo the petticuts. ” These united restorative , administer with great energy : especially that department consign to Master Bates , who appear to consider his share in the proceeding , a piece of unexampled pleasantry : be not long in produce the desired effect .
The girl gradually recover her sens ; and , stagger to a chair by the bedside , hide her face upon the pillow : leave Mr. Sikes to confront the new comer , in some astonishment at their unlooked-for appearance .
“ Why , what evil wind have blow you here ? ” he ask Fagin .
“ No evil wind at all , my dear , for evil wind blow nobody any good ; and I ’ ve brought something good with me , that you ’ ll be glad to see .
Dodger , my dear , open the bundle ; and give Bill the little trifle that we spend all our money on , this morning. ” In compliance with Mr. Fagin ’ s request , the Artful untie this bundle , which be of large size , and form of an old table-cloth ; and hand the article it contain , one by one , to Charley Bates : who place them on the table , with various encomium on their rarity and excellence .
“ Sitch a rabbit pie , Bill , ” exclaim that young gentleman , disclose to view a huge pasty ; “ sitch delicate creeturs , with sitch tender limb , Bill , that the wery bone melt in your mouth , and there ’ s no occasion to pick ’ em ; half a pound of seven and six-penny green , so precious strong that if you mix it with biling water , it ’ ll go nigh to blow the lid of the tea-pot off ; a pound and a half of moist sugar that the nigger didn ’ t work at all at , afore they get it up to sitch a pitch of goodness , —oh no !
Two half-quartern bran ; pound of best fresh ; piece of double Glo ’ ster ; and , to wind up all , some of the rich sort you ever lushed ! ” Uttering this last panegyric , Master Bates produce , from one of his extensive pocket , a full-sized wine-bottle , carefully cork ; while Mr. Dawkins , at the same instant , pour out a wine-glassful of raw spirit from the bottle he carry : which the invalid toss down his throat without a moment ’ s hesitation .
“ Ah ! ” say Fagin , rub his hand with great satisfaction .
“ You ’ ll do , Bill ; you ’ ll do now. ” “ Do ! ” exclaim Mr. Sikes ; “ I might have be do for , twenty time over , afore you ’ d have do anything to help me .
What do you mean by leave a man in this state , three week and more , you false-hearted wagabond ? ” “ Only hear him , boys ! ” say Fagin , shrug his shoulder .
“ And u come to bring him all these beau-ti-ful things. ” “ The thing be well enough in their way , ” observed Mr. Sikes : a little soothed a he glance over the table ; “ but what have you get to say for yourself , why you should leave me here , down in the mouth , health , blunt , and everything else ; and take no more notice of me , all this mortal time , than if I be that ’ ere dog.—Drive him down , Charley ! ” “ I never see such a jolly dog a that , ” cry Master Bates , do a he be desire .
“ Smelling the grub like a old lady a go to market !
He ’ d make his fortun ’ on the stage that dog would , and rewive the drayma besides. ” “ Hold your din , ” cry Sikes , a the dog retreat under the bed : still growl angrily .
“ What have you get to say for yourself , you wither old fence , eh ? ” “ I be away from London , a week and more , my dear , on a plant , ” reply the Jew .
“ And what about the other fortnight ? ” demand Sikes .
“ What about the other fortnight that you ’ ve leave me lie here , like a sick rat in his hole ? ” “ I couldn ’ t help it , Bill .
I can ’ t go into a long explanation before company ; but I couldn ’ t help it , upon my honour. ” “ Upon your what ? ” growl Sikes , with excessive disgust .
“ Here !
Cut me off a piece of that pie , one of you boys , to take the taste of that out of my mouth , or it ’ ll choke me dead. ” “ Don ’ t be out of temper , my dear , ” urge Fagin , submissively .
“ I have never forget you , Bill ; never once. ” “ No !
I ’ ll pound it that you han ’ t , ” reply Sikes , with a bitter grin .
“ You ’ ve be scheme and plot away , every hour that I have lay shivering and burning here ; and Bill be to do this ; and Bill be to do that ; and Bill be to do it all , dirt cheap , as soon a he get well : and be quite poor enough for your work .
If it hadn ’ t be for the girl , I might have died. ” “ There now , Bill , ” remonstrate Fagin , eagerly catch at the word .
“ If it hadn ’ t be for the girl !
Who but poor ould Fagin be the mean of your have such a handy girl about you ? ” “ He say true enough there ! ” say Nancy , come hastily forward .
“ Let him be ; let him be. ” Nancy ’ s appearance give a new turn to the conversation ; for the boy , receive a sly wink from the wary old Jew , begin to ply her with liquor : of which , however , she take very sparingly ; while Fagin , assume an unusual flow of spirit , gradually bring Mr. Sikes into a good temper , by affect to regard his threat a a little pleasant banter ; and , moreover , by laugh very heartily at one or two rough joke , which , after repeat application to the spirit-bottle , he condescend to make .
“ It ’ s all very well , ” say Mr. Sikes ; “ but I must have some blunt from you to-night. ” “ I haven ’ t a piece of coin about me , ” reply the Jew .
“ Then you ’ ve get lot at home , ” retort Sikes ; “ and I must have some from there. ” “ Lots ! ” cry Fagin , hold up be hand .
“ I haven ’ t so much a would— ” “ I don ’ t know how much you ’ ve get , and I dare say you hardly know yourself , a it would take a pretty long time to count it , ” say Sikes ; “ but I must have some to-night ; and that ’ s flat. ” “ Well , well , ” say Fagin , with a sigh , “ I ’ ll send the Artful round presently. ” “ You win ’ t do nothing of the kind , ” rejoin Mr. Sikes .
“ The Artful ’ s a deal too artful , and would forget to come , or lose his way , or get dodge by trap and so be perwented , or anything for an excuse , if you put him up to it .
Nancy shall go to the ken and fetch it , to make all sure ; and I ’ ll lie down and have a snooze while she ’ s gone. ” After a great deal of haggle and squabbling , Fagin beat down the amount of the required advance from five pound to three pound four and sixpence : protesting with many solemn asseveration that that would only leave him eighteen-pence to keep house with ; Mr. Sikes sullenly remark that if he couldn ’ t get any more he must accompany him home ; with the Dodger and Master Bates put the eatable in the cupboard .
The Jew then , take leave of his affectionate friend , return homeward , attend by Nancy and the boy : Mr. Sikes , meanwhile , fling himself on the bed , and compose himself to sleep away the time until the young lady ’ s return .
In due course , they arrive at Fagin ’ s abode , where they find Toby Crackit and Mr. Chitling intent upon their fifteenth game at cribbage , which it be scarcely necessary to say the latter gentleman lose , and with it , his fifteenth and last sixpence : much to the amusement of his young friend .
Mr. Crackit , apparently somewhat ashamed at be find relax himself with a gentleman so much his inferior in station and mental endowment , yawn , and inquire after Sikes , take up his hat to go .
“ Has nobody be , Toby ? ” ask Fagin .
“ Not a living leg , ” answer Mr. Crackit , pull up his collar ; “ it ’ s be as dull a swipe .
You ought to stand something handsome , Fagin , to recompense me for keep house so long .
Damme , I ’ m as flat a a juryman ; and should have go to sleep , a fast a Newgate , if I hadn ’ t have the good natur ’ to amuse this youngster .
Horrid dull , I ’ m bless if I an ’ t ! ” With these and other ejaculation of the same kind , Mr. Toby Crackit sweep up his winning , and cram them into his waistcoat pocket with a haughty air , a though such small piece of silver be wholly beneath the consideration of a man of his figure ; this do , he swagger out of the room , with so much elegance and gentility , that Mr. Chitling , bestow numerous admire glance on his leg and boot till they be out of sight , assure the company that he consider his acquaintance cheap at fifteen sixpence an interview , and that he didn ’ t value his loss the snap of his little finger .
“ Wot a rum chap you be , Tom ! ” say Master Bates , highly amuse by this declaration .
“ Not a bit of it , ” reply Mr. Chitling .
“ Am I , Fagin ? ” “ A very clever fellow , my dear , ” say Fagin , pat him on the shoulder , and wink to his other pupil .
“ And Mr. Crackit be a heavy swell ; an ’ t he , Fagin ? ” ask Tom .
“ No doubt at all of that , my dear. ” “ And it be a creditable thing to have his acquaintance ; an ’ t it , Fagin ? ” pursue Tom .
“ Very much so , indeed , my dear .
They ’ re only jealous , Tom , because he win ’ t give it to them. ” “ Ah ! ” cry Tom , triumphantly , “ that ’ s where it be !
He have clean me out .
But I can go and earn some more , when I like ; can ’ t I , Fagin ? ” “ To be sure you can , and the sooner you go the good , Tom ; so make up your loss at once , and don ’ t lose any more time .
Dodger !
Charley !
It ’ s time you be on the lay .
Come !
It ’ s near ten , and nothing do yet. ” In obedience to this hint , the boy , nod to Nancy , take up their hat , and leave the room ; the Dodger and his vivacious friend indulging , a they go , in many witticism at the expense of Mr. Chitling ; in whose conduct , it be but justice to say , there be nothing very conspicuous or peculiar : inasmuch a there be a great number of spirited young blood upon town , who pay a much high price than Mr. Chitling for be see in good society : and a great number of fine gentleman ( compose the good society aforesaid ) who establish their reputation upon very much the same footing a flash Toby Crackit .
“ Now , ” say Fagin , when they have leave the room , “ I ’ ll go and get you that cash , Nancy .
This be only the key of a little cupboard where I keep a few odd thing the boy get , my dear .
I never lock up my money , for I ’ ve get none to lock up , my dear—ha !
ha !
ha ! —none to lock up .
It ’ s a poor trade , Nancy , and no thanks ; but I ’ m fond of see the young people about me ; and I bear it all , I bear it all .
Hush ! ” he say , hastily conceal the key in his breast ; “ who ’ s that ?
Listen ! ” The girl , who be sit at the table with her arm fold , appear in no way interested in the arrival : or to care whether the person , whoever he be , come or go : until the murmur of a man ’ s voice reach her ear .
The instant she catch the sound , she tear off her bonnet and shawl , with the rapidity of lightning , and thrust them under the table .
The Jew , turn round immediately afterwards , she mutter a complaint of the heat : in a tone of languor that contrast , very remarkably , with the extreme haste and violence of this action : which , however , have be unobserved by Fagin , who have his back towards her at the time .
“ Bah ! ” he whisper , a though nettle by the interruption ; “ it ’ s the man I expect before ; he ’ s come downstairs .
Not a word about the money while he ’ s here , Nance .
He win ’ t stop long .
Not ten minute , my dear. ” Laying his skinny forefinger upon his lip , the Jew carry a candle to the door , a a man ’ s step be hear upon the stair without .
He reach it , at the same moment a the visitor , who , come hastily into the room , be close upon the girl before he observe her .
It be Monks .
“ Only one of my young people , ” say Fagin , observe that Monks draw back , on behold a stranger .
“ Don ’ t move , Nancy. ” The girl draw close to the table , and glance at Monks with an air of careless levity , withdraw her eye ; but a he turn towards Fagin , she steal another look ; so keen and searching , and full of purpose , that if there have be any bystander to observe the change , he could hardly have believe the two look to have proceed from the same person .
“ Any news ? ” inquire Fagin .
“ Great. ” “ And—and—good ? ” ask Fagin , hesitate a though he fear to vex the other man by be too sanguine .
“ Not bad , any way , ” reply Monks with a smile .
“ I have be prompt enough this time .
Let me have a word with you. ” The girl draw close to the table , and make no offer to leave the room , although she could see that Monks be point to her .
The Jew : perhaps fear she might say something aloud about the money , if he endeavour to get rid of her : point upward , and take Monks out of the room .
“ Not that infernal hole we be in before , ” she could hear the man say a they go upstairs .
Fagin laugh ; and make some reply which do not reach her , seem , by the creaking of the board , to lead his companion to the second story .
Before the sound of their footstep have cease to echo through the house , the girl have slip off her shoe ; and draw her gown loosely over her head , and muffle her arm in it , stand at the door , listen with breathless interest .
The moment the noise cease , she glide from the room ; ascend the stair with incredible softness and silence ; and be lose in the gloom above .
The room remain deserted for a quarter of an hour or more ; the girl glide back with the same unearthly tread ; and , immediately afterwards , the two men be hear descending .
Monks go at once into the street ; and the Jew crawl upstairs again for the money .
When he return , the girl be adjust her shawl and bonnet , a if preparing to be go .
“ Why , Nance ! ” exclaim the Jew , start back a he put down the candle , “ how pale you be ! ” “ Pale ! ” echo the girl , shade her eye with her hand , a if to look steadily at him .
“ Quite horrible .
What have you be do to yourself ? ” “ Nothing that I know of , except sit in this close place for I don ’ t know how long and all , ” reply the girl carelessly .
“ Come !
Let me get back ; that ’ s a dear. ” With a sigh for every piece of money , Fagin tell the amount into her hand .
They part without more conversation , merely interchange a “ good-night. ” When the girl get into the open street , she sit down upon a doorstep ; and seem , for a few moment , wholly bewilder and unable to pursue her way .
Suddenly she arise ; and hurry on , in a direction quite opposite to that in which Sikes be await her return , quicken her pace , until it gradually resolve into a violent run .
After completely exhaust herself , she stop to take breath : and , a if suddenly recollect herself , and deplore her inability to do something she be bent upon , wring her hand , and burst into tear .
It might be that her tear relieve her , or that she felt the full hopelessness of her condition ; but she turn back ; and hurry with nearly a great rapidity in the contrary direction ; partly to recover lost time , and partly to keep pace with the violent current of her own thought : soon reach the dwelling where she have leave the housebreaker .
If she betray any agitation , when she present herself to Mr. Sikes , he do not observe it ; for merely inquire if she have bring the money , and receive a reply in the affirmative , he utter a growl of satisfaction , and replace his head upon the pillow , resume the slumber which her arrival have interrupt .
It be fortunate for her that the possession of money occasion him so much employment next day in the way of eating and drinking ; and withal have so beneficial an effect in smooth down the asperity of his temper ; that he have neither time nor inclination to be very critical upon her behaviour and deportment .
That she have all the abstract and nervous manner of one who be on the eve of some bold and hazardous step , which it have require no common struggle to resolve upon , would have be obvious to the lynx-eyed Fagin , who would most probably have take the alarm at once ; but Mr. Sikes lack the nicety of discrimination , and be trouble with no more subtle misgiving than those which resolve themselves into a dogged roughness of behaviour towards everybody ; and be , furthermore , in an unusually amiable condition , a have be already observe ; saw nothing unusual in her demeanor , and indeed , trouble himself so little about her , that , have her agitation be far more perceptible than it be , it would have be very unlikely to have awaken his suspicion .
As that day close in , the girl ’ s excitement increase ; and , when night come on , and she sit by , watch until the housebreaker should drink himself asleep , there be an unusual paleness in her cheek , and a fire in her eye , that even Sikes observe with astonishment .
Mr. Sikes be weak from the fever , be lie in bed , take hot water with his gin to render it less inflammatory ; and have push his glass towards Nancy to be replenish for the third or fourth time , when these symptom first strike him .
“ Why , burn my body ! ” say the man , raise himself on his hand a he star the girl in the face .
“ You look like a corpse come to life again .
What ’ s the matter ? ” “ Matter ! ” reply the girl .
“ Nothing .
What do you look at me so hard for ? ” “ What foolery be this ? ” demand Sikes , grasp her by the arm , and shake her roughly .
“ What be it ?
What do you mean ?
What be you think of ? ” “ Of many thing , Bill , ” reply the girl , shivering , and a she do so , press her hand upon her eye .
“ But , Lord !
What odds in that ? ” The tone of force gaiety in which the last word be speak , seem to produce a deep impression on Sikes than the wild and rigid look which have precede them .
“ I tell you wot it be , ” say Sikes ; “ if you haven ’ t catch the fever , and get it comin ’ on , now , there ’ s something more than usual in the wind , and something dangerous too .
You ’ re not a-going to— .
No , damme !
you wouldn ’ t do that ! ” “ Do what ? ” ask the girl .
“ There ain ’ t , ” say Sikes , fix his eye upon her , and mutter the word to himself ; “ there ain ’ t a stauncher-hearted gal go , or I ’ d have cut her throat three month ago .
She ’ s get the fever come on ; that ’ s it. ” Fortifying himself with this assurance , Sikes drain the glass to the bottom , and then , with many grumble oath , call for his physic .
The girl jump up , with great alacrity ; pour it quickly out , but with her back towards him ; and hold the vessel to his lip , while he drink off the content .
“ Now , ” say the robber , “ come and sit aside of me , and put on your own face ; or I ’ ll alter it so , that you win ’ t know it agin when you do want it. ” The girl obey .
Sikes , lock her hand in his , fell back upon the pillow : turn his eye upon her face .
They close ; open again ; close once more ; again open .
He shift his position restlessly ; and , after doze again , and again , for two or three minute , and as often spring up with a look of terror , and gaze vacantly about him , be suddenly stricken , a it be , while in the very attitude of rise , into a deep and heavy sleep .
The grasp of his hand relax ; the upraised arm fell languidly by his side ; and he lay like one in a profound trance .
“ The laudanum have take effect at last , ” murmur the girl , a she rise from the bedside .
“ I may be too late , even now. ” She hastily dress herself in her bonnet and shawl : look fearfully round , from time to time , a if , despite the sleeping draught , she expect every moment to feel the pressure of Sikes ’ s heavy hand upon her shoulder ; then , stoop softly over the bed , she kiss the robber ’ s lip ; and then opening and close the room-door with noiseless touch , hurry from the house .
A watchman be cry half-past nine , down a dark passage through which she have to pass , in gain the main thoroughfare .
“ Has it long go the half-hour ? ” ask the girl .
“ It ’ ll strike the hour in another quarter , ” say the man : raise his lantern to her face .
“ And I can not get there in less than an hour or more , ” mutter Nancy : brushing swiftly past him , and glide rapidly down the street .
Many of the shop be already close in the back lane and avenue through which she track her way , in make from Spitalfields towards the West-End of London .
The clock strike ten , increase her impatience .
She tore along the narrow pavement : elbow the passenger from side to side ; and dart almost under the horse ’ head , cross crowd street , where cluster of person be eagerly watch their opportunity to do the like .
“ The woman be mad ! ” say the people , turn to look after her a she rush away .
When she reach the more wealthy quarter of the town , the street be comparatively desert ; and here her headlong progress excite a still great curiosity in the straggler whom she hurry past .
Some quicken their pace behind , a though to see whither she be hasten at such an unusual rate ; and a few make head upon her , and look back , surprise at her undiminished speed ; but they fell off one by one ; and when she near her place of destination , she be alone .
It be a family hotel in a quiet but handsome street near Hyde Park .
As the brilliant light of the lamp which burn before it door , guide her to the spot , the clock strike eleven .
She have loiter for a few pace a though irresolute , and make up her mind to advance ; but the sound determine her , and she step into the hall .
The porter ’ s seat be vacant .
She look round with an air of incertitude , and advance towards the stair .
“ Now , young woman ! ” say a smartly-dressed female , look out from a door behind her , “ who do you want here ? ” “ A lady who be stop in this house , ” answer the girl .
“ A lady ! ” be the reply , accompany with a scornful look .
“ What lady ? ” “ Miss Maylie , ” say Nancy .
The young woman , who have by this time , note her appearance , reply only by a look of virtuous disdain ; and summon a man to answer her .
To him , Nancy repeat her request .
“ What name be I to say ? ” ask the waiter .
“ It ’ s of no use say any , ” reply Nancy .
“ Nor business ? ” say the man .
“ No , nor that neither , ” rejoin the girl .
“ I must see the lady. ” “ Come ! ” say the man , push her towards the door .
“ None of this .
Take yourself off. ” “ I shall be carry out if I go ! ” say the girl violently ; “ and I can make that a job that two of you win ’ t like to do .
Isn ’ t there anybody here , ” she say , look round , “ that will see a simple message carry for a poor wretch like me ? ” This appeal produce an effect on a good-tempered-faced man-cook , who with some of the other servant be look on , and who step forward to interfere .
“ Take it up for her , Joe ; can ’ t you ? ” say this person .
“ What ’ s the good ? ” reply the man .
“ You don ’ t suppose the young lady will see such a her ; do you ? ” This allusion to Nancy ’ s doubtful character , raise a vast quantity of chaste wrath in the bosom of four housemaid , who remark , with great fervour , that the creature be a disgrace to her sex ; and strongly advocate her be throw , ruthlessly , into the kennel .
“ Do what you like with me , ” say the girl , turn to the men again ; “ but do what I ask you first , and I ask you to give this message for God Almighty ’ s sake. ” The soft-hearted cook add his intercession , and the result be that the man who have first appear undertook it delivery .
“ What ’ s it to be ? ” say the man , with one foot on the stair .
“ That a young woman earnestly ask to speak to Miss Maylie alone , ” say Nancy ; “ and that if the lady will only hear the first word she have to say , she will know whether to hear her business , or to have her turn out of door a an impostor. ” “ I say , ” say the man , “ you ’ re come it strong ! ” “ You give the message , ” say the girl firmly ; “ and let me hear the answer. ” The man run upstairs .
Nancy remain , pale and almost breathless , listen with quiver lip to the very audible expression of scorn , of which the chaste housemaid be very prolific ; and of which they become still more so , when the man return , and say the young woman be to walk upstairs .
“ It ’ s no good be proper in this world , ” say the first housemaid .
“ Brass can do good than the gold what have stand the fire , ” say the second .
The third content herself with wonder “ what ladies be make of ” ; and the fourth take the first in a quartette of “ Shameful ! ” with which the Dianas conclude .
Regardless of all this : for she have weighty matter at heart : Nancy follow the man , with tremble limb , to a small ante-chamber , light by a lamp from the ceiling .
Here he leave her , and retire .
CHAPTER XL .
A STRANGE INTERVIEW , WHICH IS A SEQUEL TO THE LAST CHAMBER The girl ’ s life have be squander in the street , and among the most noisome of the stew and den of London , but there be something of the woman ’ s original nature leave in her still ; and when she hear a light step approach the door opposite to that by which she have enter , and thought of the wide contrast which the small room would in another moment contain , she felt burden with the sense of her own deep shame , and shrunk a though she could scarcely bear the presence of her with whom she have seek this interview .
But struggle with these good feeling be pride , —the vice of the low and most debased creature no less than of the high and self-assured .
The miserable companion of thief and ruffian , the fall outcast of low haunt , the associate of the scouring of the jail and hulk , live within the shadow of the gallows itself , —even this degrade be felt too proud to betray a feeble gleam of the womanly feeling which she think a weakness , but which alone connect her with that humanity , of which her waste life have obliterate so many , many trace when a very child .
She raise her eye sufficiently to observe that the figure which present itself be that of a slight and beautiful girl ; then , bend them on the ground , she toss her head with affected carelessness a she say : “ It ’ s a hard matter to get to see you , lady .
If I have take offence , and go away , a many would have do , you ’ d have be sorry for it one day , and not without reason either. ” “ I be very sorry if any one have behave harshly to you , ” reply Rose .
“ Do not think of that .
Tell me why you wish to see me .
I be the person you inquire for. ” The kind tone of this answer , the sweet voice , the gentle manner , the absence of any accent of haughtiness or displeasure , take the girl completely by surprise , and she burst into tear .
“ Oh , lady , lady ! ” she say , clasp her hand passionately before her face , “ if there be more like you , there would be few like me , —there would—there would ! ” “ Sit down , ” say Rose , earnestly .
“ If you be in poverty or affliction I shall be truly glad to relieve you if I can , —I shall indeed .
Sit down. ” “ Let me stand , lady , ” say the girl , still weep , “ and do not speak to me so kindly till you know me good .
It be grow late .
Is—is—that door shut ? ” “ Yes , ” say Rose , recoil a few step , a if to be near assistance in case she should require it .
“ Why ? ” “ Because , ” say the girl , “ I be about to put my life and the life of others in your hand .
I be the girl that drag little Oliver back to old Fagin ’ s on the night he go out from the house in Pentonville. ” “ You ! ” say Rose Maylie .
“ I , lady ! ” reply the girl .
“ I be the infamous creature you have hear of , that live among the thief , and that never from the first moment I can recollect my eye and sens open on London street have know any good life , or kind word than they have give me , so help me God !
Do not mind shrink openly from me , lady .
I be young than you would think , to look at me , but I be well use to it .
The poor woman fall back , a I make my way along the crowded pavement. ” “ What dreadful thing be these ! ” say Rose , involuntarily fall from her strange companion .
“ Thank Heaven upon your knee , dear lady , ” cry the girl , “ that you have friend to care for and keep you in your childhood , and that you be never in the midst of cold and hunger , and riot and drunkenness , and—and—something bad than all—as I have be from my cradle .
I may use the word , for the alley and the gutter be mine , a they will be my deathbed. ” “ I pity you ! ” say Rose , in a broken voice .
“ It wring my heart to hear you ! ” “ Heaven bless you for your goodness ! ” rejoin the girl .
“ If you know what I be sometimes , you would pity me , indeed .
But I have steal away from those who would surely murder me , if they know I have be here , to tell you what I have overhear .
Do you know a man name Monks ? ” “ No , ” say Rose .
“ He know you , ” reply the girl ; “ and know you be here , for it be by hear him tell the place that I find you out. ” “ I never hear the name , ” say Rose .
“ Then he go by some other amongst u , ” rejoin the girl , “ which I more than thought before .
Some time ago , and soon after Oliver be put into your house on the night of the robbery , I—suspecting this man—listened to a conversation hold between him and Fagin in the dark .
I find out , from what I hear , that Monks—the man I ask you about , you know— ” “ Yes , ” say Rose , “ I understand. ” “ —That Monks , ” pursue the girl , “ have see him accidently with two of our boy on the day we first lose him , and have know him directly to be the same child that he be watch for , though I couldn ’ t make out why .
A bargain be strike with Fagin , that if Oliver be get back he should have a certain sum ; and he be to have more for make him a thief , which this Monks want for some purpose of his own. ” “ For what purpose ? ” ask Rose .
“ He catch sight of my shadow on the wall a I listen , in the hope of find out , ” say the girl ; “ and there be not many people besides me that could have get out of their way in time to escape discovery .
But I do ; and I saw him no more till last night. ” “ And what occur then ? ” “ I ’ ll tell you , lady .
Last night he come again .
Again they go upstairs , and I , wrap myself up so that my shadow would not betray me , again listen at the door .
The first word I hear Monks say be these : ‘ So the only proof of the boy ’ s identity lie at the bottom of the river , and the old hag that receive them from the mother be rot in her coffin. ’ They laugh , and talk of his success in do this ; and Monks , talk on about the boy , and get very wild , say that though he have get the young devil ’ s money safely now , he ’ d rather have have it the other way ; for , what a game it would have be to have bring down the boast of the father ’ s will , by drive him through every jail in town , and then haul him up for some capital felony which Fagin could easily manage , after have make a good profit of him besides. ” “ What be all this ! ” say Rose .
“ The truth , lady , though it come from my lip , ” reply the girl .
“ Then , he say , with oaths common enough in my ear , but strange to yours , that if he could gratify his hatred by take the boy ’ s life without bring his own neck in danger , he would ; but , a he couldn ’ t , he ’ d be upon the watch to meet him at every turn in life ; and if he take advantage of his birth and history , he might harm him yet .
‘ In short , Fagin , ’ he say , ‘ Jew a you be , you never lay such snare a I ’ ll contrive for my young brother , Oliver. ’ ” “ His brother ! ” exclaim Rose .
“ Those be his word , ” say Nancy , glance uneasily round , a she have scarcely cease to do , since she begin to speak , for a vision of Sikes haunt her perpetually .
“ And more .
When he speak of you and the other lady , and say it seem contrive by Heaven , or the devil , against him , that Oliver should come into your hand , he laugh , and say there be some comfort in that too , for how many thousand and hundred of thousand of pound would you not give , if you have them , to know who your two-legged spaniel was. ” “ You do not mean , ” say Rose , turn very pale , “ to tell me that this be say in earnest ? ” “ He speak in hard and angry earnest , if a man ever do , ” reply the girl , shake her head .
“ He be an earnest man when his hatred be up .
I know many who do bad thing ; but I ’ d rather listen to them all a dozen time , than to that Monks once .
It be grow late , and I have to reach home without suspicion of have be on such an errand a this .
I must get back quickly. ” “ But what can I do ? ” say Rose .
“ To what use can I turn this communication without you ?
Back !
Why do you wish to return to companion you paint in such terrible color ?
If you repeat this information to a gentleman whom I can summon in an instant from the next room , you can be consign to some place of safety without half an hour ’ s delay. ” “ I wish to go back , ” say the girl .
“ I must go back , because—how can I tell such thing to an innocent lady like you ? —because among the men I have tell you of , there be one : the most desperate among them all ; that I can ’ t leave : no , not even to be save from the life I be lead now. ” “ Your have interfere in this dear boy ’ s behalf before , ” say Rose ; “ your come here , at so great a risk , to tell me what you have hear ; your manner , which convince me of the truth of what you say ; your evident contrition , and sense of shame ; all lead me to believe that you might yet be reclaim .
Oh ! ” say the earnest girl , fold her hand a the tear course down her face , “ do not turn a deaf ear to the entreaty of one of your own sex ; the first—the first , I do believe , who ever appeal to you in the voice of pity and compassion .
Do hear my word , and let me save you yet , for good things. ” “ Lady , ” cry the girl , sink on her knee , “ dear , sweet , angel lady , you _are_ the first that ever bless me with such word a these , and if I have hear them year ago , they might have turn me from a life of sin and sorrow ; but it be too late , it be too late ! ” “ It be never too late , ” say Rose , “ for penitence and atonement. ” “ It be , ” cry the girl , writhe in agony of her mind ; “ I can not leave him now !
I could not be his death. ” “ Why should you be ? ” ask Rose .
“ Nothing could save him , ” cry the girl .
“ If I tell others what I have tell you , and lead to their be take , he would be sure to die .
He be the boldest , and have be so cruel ! ” “ Is it possible , ” cry Rose , “ that for such a man a this , you can resign every future hope , and the certainty of immediate rescue ?
It be madness. ” “ I don ’ t know what it be , ” answer the girl ; “ I only know that it be so , and not with me alone , but with hundred of others a bad and wretched a myself .
I must go back .
Whether it be God ’ s wrath for the wrong I have do , I do not know ; but I be draw back to him through every suffering and ill usage ; and I should be , I believe , if I know that I be to die by his hand at last. ” “ What be I to do ? ” say Rose .
“ I should not let you depart from me thus. ” “ You should , lady , and I know you will , ” rejoin the girl , rise .
“ You will not stop my go because I have trust in your goodness , and force no promise from you , a I might have done. ” “ Of what use , then , be the communication you have make ? ” say Rose .
“ This mystery must be investigate , or how will it disclosure to me , benefit Oliver , whom you be anxious to serve ? ” “ You must have some kind gentleman about you that will hear it a a secret , and advise you what to do , ” rejoin the girl .
“ But where can I find you again when it be necessary ? ” ask Rose .
“ I do not seek to know where these dreadful people live , but where will you be walk or pass at any settled period from this time ? ” “ Will you promise me that you will have my secret strictly keep , and come alone , or with the only other person that know it ; and that I shall not be watch or follow ? ” ask the girl .
“ I promise you solemnly , ” answer Rose .
“ Every Sunday night , from eleven until the clock strike twelve , ” say the girl without hesitation , “ I will walk on London Bridge if I be alive. ” “ Stay another moment , ” interpose Rose , a the girl move hurriedly towards the door .
“ Think once again on your own condition , and the opportunity you have of escape from it .
You have a claim on me : not only a the voluntary bearer of this intelligence , but a a woman lose almost beyond redemption .
Will you return to this gang of robber , and to this man , when a word can save you ?
What fascination be it that can take you back , and make you cling to wickedness and misery ?
Oh !
be there no chord in your heart that I can touch !
Is there nothing leave , to which I can appeal against this terrible infatuation ! ” “ When lady a young , and good , and beautiful a you be , ” reply the girl steadily , “ give away your heart , love will carry you all lengths—even such a you , who have home , friend , other admirer , everything , to fill them .
When such a I , who have no certain roof but the coffinlid , and no friend in sickness or death but the hospital nurse , set our rotten heart on any man , and let him fill the place that have be a blank through all our wretched life , who can hope to cure u ?
Pity u , lady—pity u for have only one feeling of the woman leave , and for have that turn , by a heavy judgment , from a comfort and a pride , into a new mean of violence and suffering. ” “ You will , ” say Rose , after a pause , “ take some money from me , which may enable you to live without dishonesty—at all event until we meet again ? ” “ Not a penny , ” reply the girl , wave her hand .
“ Do not close your heart against all my effort to help you , ” say Rose , step gently forward .
“ I wish to serve you indeed. ” “ You would serve me best , lady , ” reply the girl , wring her hand , “ if you could take my life at once ; for I have felt more grief to think of what I be , to-night , than I ever do before , and it would be something not to die in the hell in which I have live .
God bless you , sweet lady , and send as much happiness on your head a I have bring shame on mine ! ” Thus speaking , and sob aloud , the unhappy creature turn away ; while Rose Maylie , overpower by this extraordinary interview , which have more the semblance of a rapid dream than an actual occurrence , sink into a chair , and endeavour to collect her wander thought .
CHAPTER XLI .
CONTAINING FRESH DISCOVERIES , AND SHOWING THAT SUPRISES , LIKE MISFORTUNES , SELDOM COME ALONE Her situation be , indeed , one of no common trial and difficulty .
While she felt the most eager and burn desire to penetrate the mystery in which Oliver ’ s history be envelop , she could not but hold sacred the confidence which the miserable woman with whom she have just converse , have repose in her , a a young and guileless girl .
Her word and manner have touch Rose Maylie ’ s heart ; and , mingle with her love for her young charge , and scarcely less intense in it truth and fervour , be her fond wish to win the outcast back to repentance and hope .
They purpose remain in London only three day , prior to depart for some week to a distant part of the coast .
It be now midnight of the first day .
What course of action could she determine upon , which could be adopt in eight-and-forty hour ?
Or how could she postpone the journey without excite suspicion ?
Mr. Losberne be with them , and would be for the next two day ; but Rose be too well acquaint with the excellent gentleman ’ s impetuosity , and foresee too clearly the wrath with which , in the first explosion of his indignation , he would regard the instrument of Oliver ’ s recapture , to trust him with the secret , when her representation in the girl ’ s behalf could be second by no experienced person .
These be all reason for the great caution and most circumspect behaviour in communicate it to Mrs. Maylie , whose first impulse would infallibly be to hold a conference with the worthy doctor on the subject .
As to resort to any legal adviser , even if she have know how to do so , it be scarcely to be think of , for the same reason .
Once the thought occur to her of seek assistance from Harry ; but this awaken the recollection of their last parting , and it seem unworthy of her to call him back , when—the tear rise to her eye a she pursue this train of reflection—he might have by this time learn to forget her , and to be happy away .
Disturbed by these different reflection ; incline now to one course and then to another , and again recoil from all , a each successive consideration present itself to her mind ; Rose pass a sleepless and anxious night .
After more commune with herself next day , she arrive at the desperate conclusion of consult Harry .
“ If it be painful to him , ” she think , “ to come back here , how painful it will be to me !
But perhaps he will not come ; he may write , or he may come himself , and studiously abstain from meet me—he do when he go away .
I hardly think he would ; but it be well for u both. ” And here Rose drop the pen , and turn away , a though the very paper which be to be her messenger should not see her weep .
She have take up the same pen , and lay it down again fifty time , and have consider and reconsider the first line of her letter without write the first word , when Oliver , who have be walk in the street , with Mr. Giles for a body-guard , enter the room in such breathless haste and violent agitation , a seem to betoken some new cause of alarm .
“ What make you look so flurry ? ” ask Rose , advance to meet him .
“ I hardly know how ; I feel a if I should be choke , ” reply the boy .
“ Oh dear !
To think that I should see him at last , and you should be able to know that I have tell you the truth ! ” “ I never think you have tell u anything but the truth , ” say Rose , soothe him .
“ But what be this ? —of whom do you speak ? ” “ I have see the gentleman , ” reply Oliver , scarcely able to articulate , “ the gentleman who be so good to me—Mr .
Brownlow , that we have so often talked about. ” “ Where ? ” ask Rose .
“ Getting out of a coach , ” reply Oliver , shed tear of delight , “ and go into a house .
I didn ’ t speak to him—I couldn ’ t speak to him , for he didn ’ t see me , and I tremble so , that I be not able to go up to him .
But Giles ask , for me , whether he live there , and they say he do .
Look here , ” say Oliver , open a scrap of paper , “ here it be ; here ’ s where he lives—I ’ m go there directly !
Oh , dear me , dear me !
What shall I do when I come to see him and hear him speak again ! ” With her attention not a little distract by these and a great many other incoherent exclamation of joy , Rose read the address , which be Craven Street , in the Strand .
She very soon determine upon turn the discovery to account .
“ Quick ! ” she say .
“ Tell them to fetch a hackney-coach , and be ready to go with me .
I will take you there directly , without a minute ’ s loss of time .
I will only tell my aunt that we be go out for an hour , and be ready as soon a you are. ” Oliver need no prompt to despatch , and in little more than five minute they be on their way to Craven Street .
When they arrive there , Rose leave Oliver in the coach , under pretence of prepare the old gentleman to receive him ; and send up her card by the servant , request to see Mr. Brownlow on very press business .
The servant soon return , to beg that she would walk upstairs ; and follow him into an upper room , Miss Maylie be present to an elderly gentleman of benevolent appearance , in a bottle-green coat .
At no great distance from whom , be seat another old gentleman , in nankeen breech and gaiter ; who do not look particularly benevolent , and who be sit with his hand clasp on the top of a thick stick , and his chin prop thereupon .
“ Dear me , ” say the gentleman , in the bottle-green coat , hastily rise with great politeness , “ I beg your pardon , young lady—I imagine it be some importunate person who—I beg you will excuse me .
Be seat , pray. ” “ Mr .
Brownlow , I believe , sir ? ” say Rose , glance from the other gentleman to the one who have speak .
“ That be my name , ” say the old gentleman .
“ This be my friend , Mr. Grimwig .
Grimwig , will you leave u for a few minute ? ” “ I believe , ” interposed Miss Maylie , “ that at this period of our interview , I need not give that gentleman the trouble of go away .
If I be correctly inform , he be cognizant of the business on which I wish to speak to you. ” Mr. Brownlow incline his head .
Mr. Grimwig , who have make one very stiff bow , and risen from his chair , make another very stiff bow , and drop into it again .
“ I shall surprise you very much , I have no doubt , ” say Rose , naturally embarrass ; “ but you once show great benevolence and goodness to a very dear young friend of mine , and I be sure you will take an interest in hearing of him again. ” “ Indeed ! ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ Oliver Twist you know him a , ” reply Rose .
The word no sooner escape her lip , than Mr. Grimwig , who have be affect to dip into a large book that lay on the table , upset it with a great crash , and fall back in his chair , discharge from his feature every expression but one of unmitigated wonder , and indulge in a prolonged and vacant stare ; then , a if ashamed of have betray so much emotion , he jerk himself , a it be , by a convulsion into his former attitude , and look out straight before him emit a long deep whistle , which seem , at last , not to be discharge on empty air , but to die away in the innermost recess of his stomach .
Mr. Browlow be no less surprised , although his astonishment be not express in the same eccentric manner .
He draw his chair nearer to Miss Maylie ’ s , and say , “ Do me the favour , my dear young lady , to leave entirely out of the question that goodness and benevolence of which you speak , and of which nobody else know anything ; and if you have it in your power to produce any evidence which will alter the unfavourable opinion I be once induce to entertain of that poor child , in Heaven ’ s name put me in possession of it. ” “ A bad one !
I ’ ll eat my head if he be not a bad one , ” growl Mr. Grimwig , speaking by some ventriloquial power , without move a muscle of his face .
“ He be a child of a noble nature and a warm heart , ” say Rose , colour ; “ and that Power which have think fit to try him beyond his year , have plant in his breast affection and feeling which would do honour to many who have number his day six time over. ” “ I ’ m only sixty-one , ” say Mr. Grimwig , with the same rigid face .
“ And , a the devil ’ s in it if this Oliver be not twelve year old at least , I don ’ t see the application of that remark. ” “ Do not heed my friend , Miss Maylie , ” say Mr. Brownlow ; “ he do not mean what he says. ” “ Yes , he do , ” growl Mr. Grimwig .
“ No , he do not , ” say Mr. Brownlow , obviously rise in wrath a he speak .
“ He ’ ll eat his head , if he doesn ’ t , ” growl Mr. Grimwig .
“ He would deserve to have it knock off , if he do , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ And he ’ d uncommonly like to see any man offer to do it , ” respond Mr. Grimwig , knock his stick upon the floor .
Having go thus far , the two old gentleman severally take snuff , and afterwards shake hand , accord to their invariable custom .
“ Now , Miss Maylie , ” say Mr. Brownlow , “ to return to the subject in which your humanity be so much interested .
Will you let me know what intelligence you have of this poor child : allow me to promise that I exhaust every mean in my power of discover him , and that since I have be absent from this country , my first impression that he have impose upon me , and have be persuade by his former associate to rob me , have be considerably shaken. ” Rose , who have have time to collect her thought , at once relate , in a few natural word , all that have befall Oliver since he leave Mr. Brownlow ’ s house ; reserve Nancy ’ s information for that gentleman ’ s private ear , and conclude with the assurance that his only sorrow , for some month past , have be not be able to meet with his former benefactor and friend .
“ Thank God ! ” say the old gentleman .
“ This be great happiness to me , great happiness .
But you have not tell me where he be now , Miss Maylie .
You must pardon my find fault with you , —but why not have bring him ? ” “ He be wait in a coach at the door , ” reply Rose .
“ At this door ! ” cry the old gentleman .
With which he hurry out of the room , down the stair , up the coachsteps , and into the coach , without another word .
When the room-door close behind him , Mr. Grimwig lift up his head , and convert one of the hind leg of his chair into a pivot , describe three distinct circle with the assistance of his stick and the table ; sit in it all the time .
After perform this evolution , he rise and limp as fast a he could up and down the room at least a dozen time , and then stop suddenly before Rose , kiss her without the slight preface .
“ Hush ! ” he say , a the young lady rise in some alarm at this unusual proceeding .
“ Don ’ t be afraid .
I ’ m old enough to be your grandfather .
You ’ re a sweet girl .
I like you .
Here they be ! ” In fact , a he throw himself at one dexterous dive into his former seat , Mr. Brownlow return , accompany by Oliver , whom Mr. Grimwig receive very graciously ; and if the gratification of that moment have be the only reward for all her anxiety and care in Oliver ’ s behalf , Rose Maylie would have be well repay .
“ There be somebody else who should not be forget , by the bye , ” say Mr. Brownlow , ring the bell .
“ Send Mrs. Bedwin here , if you please. ” The old housekeeper answer the summons with all dispatch ; and drop a curtsey at the door , wait for order .
“ Why , you get blind every day , Bedwin , ” say Mr. Brownlow , rather testily .
“ Well , that I do , sir , ” reply the old lady .
“ People ’ s eye , at my time of life , don ’ t improve with age , sir. ” “ I could have tell you that , ” rejoin Mr. Brownlow ; “ but put on your glass , and see if you can ’ t find out what you be want for , will you ? ” The old lady begin to rummage in her pocket for her spectacle .
But Oliver ’ s patience be not proof against this new trial ; and yield to his first impulse , he spring into her arm .
“ God be good to me ! ” cry the old lady , embrace him ; “ it be my innocent boy ! ” “ My dear old nurse ! ” cry Oliver .
“ He would come back—I knew he would , ” say the old lady , hold him in her arm .
“ How well he look , and how like a gentleman ’ s son he be dress again !
Where have you be , this long , long while ?
Ah !
the same sweet face , but not so pale ; the same soft eye , but not so sad .
I have never forget them or his quiet smile , but have see them every day , side by side with those of my own dear child , dead and go since I be a lightsome young creature. ” Running on thus , and now hold Oliver from her to mark how he have grow , now clasp him to her and pass her finger fondly through his hair , the good soul laugh and wept upon his neck by turn .
Leaving her and Oliver to compare note at leisure , Mr. Brownlow lead the way into another room ; and there , heard from Rose a full narration of her interview with Nancy , which occasion him no little surprise and perplexity .
Rose also explain her reason for not confide in her friend Mr. Losberne in the first instance .
The old gentleman consider that she have act prudently , and readily undertake to hold solemn conference with the worthy doctor himself .
To afford him an early opportunity for the execution of this design , it be arrange that he should call at the hotel at eight o ’ clock that evening , and that in the meantime Mrs. Maylie should be cautiously inform of all that have occur .
These preliminary adjust , Rose and Oliver return home .
Rose have by no mean overrate the measure of the good doctor ’ s wrath .
Nancy ’ s history be no sooner unfold to him , than he pour forth a shower of mingled threat and execration ; threaten to make her the first victim of the combined ingenuity of Messrs. Blathers and Duff ; and actually put on his hat preparatory to sallying forth to obtain the assistance of those worthy .
And , doubtless , he would , in this first outbreak , have carry the intention into effect without a moment ’ s consideration of the consequence , if he have not be restrain , in part , by correspond violence on the side of Mr. Brownlow , who be himself of an irascible temperament , and party by such argument and representation a seemed best calculate to dissuade him from his hotbrained purpose .
“ Then what the devil be to be do ? ” say the impetuous doctor , when they have rejoin the two lady .
“ Are we to pass a vote of thanks to all these vagabond , male and female , and beg them to accept a hundred pound , or so , apiece , a a trifle mark of our esteem , and some slight acknowledgment of their kindness to Oliver ? ” “ Not exactly that , ” rejoin Mr. Brownlow , laugh ; “ but we must proceed gently and with great care. ” “ Gentleness and care , ” exclaim the doctor .
“ I ’ d send them one and all to— ” “ Never mind where , ” interposed Mr. Brownlow .
“ But reflect whether send them anywhere be likely to attain the object we have in view. ” “ What object ? ” ask the doctor .
“ Simply , the discovery of Oliver ’ s parentage , and regain for him the inheritance of which , if this story be true , he have be fraudulently deprived. ” “ Ah ! ” say Mr. Losberne , cool himself with his pocket-handkerchief ; “ I almost forget that. ” “ You see , ” pursue Mr. Brownlow ; “ place this poor girl entirely out of the question , and suppose it be possible to bring these scoundrel to justice without compromise her safety , what good should we bring about ? ” “ Hanging a few of them at least , in all probability , ” suggest the doctor , “ and transport the rest. ” “ Very good , ” reply Mr. Brownlow , smile ; “ but no doubt they will bring that about for themselves in the fulness of time , and if we step in to forestall them , it seem to me that we shall be perform a very Quixotic act , in direct opposition to our own interest—or at least to Oliver ’ s , which be the same thing. ” “ How ? ” inquire the doctor .
“ Thus .
It be quite clear that we shall have extreme difficulty in get to the bottom of this mystery , unless we can bring this man , Monks , upon his knee .
That can only be do by stratagem , and by catch him when he be not surround by these people .
For , suppose he be apprehend , we have no proof against him .
He be not even ( so far a we know , or a the fact appear to u ) concern with the gang in any of their robbery .
If he be not discharge , it be very unlikely that he could receive any further punishment than be commit to prison a a rogue and vagabond ; and of course ever afterwards his mouth would be so obstinately close that he might as well , for our purpose , be deaf , dumb , blind , and an idiot. ” “ Then , ” say the doctor impetuously , “ I put it to you again , whether you think it reasonable that this promise to the girl should be consider binding ; a promise make with the best and kind intention , but really— ” “ Do not discuss the point , my dear young lady , pray , ” say Mr. Brownlow , interrupt Rose a she be about to speak .
“ The promise shall be keep .
I don ’ t think it will , in the slight degree , interfere with our proceeding .
But , before we can resolve upon any precise course of action , it will be necessary to see the girl ; to ascertain from her whether she will point out this Monks , on the understanding that he be to be deal with by u , and not by the law ; or , if she will not , or can not do that , to procure from her such an account of his haunt and description of his person , a will enable u to identify him .
She can not be see until next Sunday night ; this be Tuesday .
I would suggest that in the meantime , we remain perfectly quiet , and keep these matter secret even from Oliver himself. ” Although Mr. Losberne receive with many wry face a proposal involve a delay of five whole day , he be fain to admit that no good course occur to him just then ; and a both Rose and Mrs. Maylie side very strongly with Mr. Brownlow , that gentleman ’ s proposition be carry unanimously .
“ I should like , ” he say , “ to call in the aid of my friend Grimwig .
He be a strange creature , but a shrewd one , and might prove of material assistance to u ; I should say that he be breed a lawyer , and quit the Bar in disgust because he have only one brief and a motion of course , in twenty year , though whether that be recommendation or not , you must determine for yourselves. ” “ I have no objection to your call in your friend if I may call in mine , ” say the doctor .
“ We must put it to the vote , ” reply Mr. Brownlow , “ who may he be ? ” “ That lady ’ s son , and this young lady ’ s—very old friend , ” say the doctor , motion towards Mrs. Maylie , and conclude with an expressive glance at her niece .
Rose blush deeply , but she do not make any audible objection to this motion ( possibly she felt in a hopeless minority ) ; and Harry Maylie and Mr. Grimwig be accordingly add to the committee .
“ We stay in town , of course , ” say Mrs. Maylie , “ while there remain the slight prospect of prosecute this inquiry with a chance of success .
I will spare neither trouble nor expense in behalf of the object in which we be all so deeply interested , and I be content to remain here , if it be for twelve month , so long a you assure me that any hope remains. ” “ Good ! ” rejoin Mr. Brownlow .
“ And a I see on the face about me , a disposition to inquire how it happen that I be not in the way to corroborate Oliver ’ s tale , and have so suddenly leave the kingdom , let me stipulate that I shall be ask no question until such time a I may deem it expedient to forestall them by tell my own story .
Believe me , I make this request with good reason , for I might otherwise excite hope destine never to be realise , and only increase difficulty and disappointment already quite numerous enough .
Come !
Supper have be announce , and young Oliver , who be all alone in the next room , will have begin to think , by this time , that we have weary of his company , and enter into some dark conspiracy to thrust him forth upon the world. ” With these word , the old gentleman give his hand to Mrs. Maylie , and escort her into the supper-room .
Mr. Losberne follow , lead Rose ; and the council be , for the present , effectually break up .
CHAPTER XLII .
AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE OF OLIVER ’ S , EXHIBITING DECIDED MARKS OF GENIUS , BECOMES A PUBLIC CHARACTER IN THE METROPOLIS Upon the night when Nancy , have lull Mr. Sikes to sleep , hurry on her self-imposed mission to Rose Maylie , there advanced towards London , by the Great North Road , two person , upon whom it be expedient that this history should bestow some attention .
They be a man and woman ; or perhaps they would be well describe a a male and female : for the former be one of those long-limbed , knock-kneed , shamble , bony people , to whom it be difficult to assign any precise age , —looking a they do , when they be yet boys , like undergrown men , and when they be almost men , like overgrown boy .
The woman be young , but of a robust and hardy make , a she need have be to bear the weight of the heavy bundle which be strap to her back .
Her companion be not encumber with much luggage , a there merely dangle from a stick which he carry over his shoulder , a small parcel wrap in a common handkerchief , and apparently light enough .
This circumstance , add to the length of his leg , which be of unusual extent , enable him with much ease to keep some half-dozen pace in advance of his companion , to whom he occasionally turn with an impatient jerk of the head : a if reproach her tardiness , and urge her to great exertion .
Thus , they have toil along the dusty road , take little heed of any object within sight , save when they step aside to allow a wide passage for the mail-coaches which be whirl out of town , until they pass through Highgate archway ; when the foremost traveller stop and call impatiently to his companion , “ Come on , can ’ t yer ?
What a lazybones yer be , Charlotte. ” “ It ’ s a heavy load , I can tell you , ” say the female , come up , almost breathless with fatigue .
“ Heavy !
What be yer talk about ?
What be yer make for ? ” rejoin the male traveller , change his own little bundle a he speak , to the other shoulder .
“ Oh , there yer be , rest again !
Well , if yer ain ’ t enough to tire anybody ’ s patience out , I don ’ t know what be ! ” “ Is it much far ? ” ask the woman , rest herself against a bank , and look up with the perspiration stream from her face .
“ Much farther !
Yer as good a there , ” say the long-legged tramper , point out before him .
“ Look there !
Those be the light of London. ” “ They ’ re a good two mile off , at least , ” say the woman despondingly .
“ Never mind whether they ’ re two mile off , or twenty , ” say Noah Claypole ; for he it be ; “ but get up and come on , or I ’ ll kick yer , and so I give yer notice. ” As Noah ’ s red nose grow redder with anger , and a he cross the road while speak , a if fully prepare to put his threat into execution , the woman rise without any further remark , and trudge onward by his side .
“ Where do you mean to stop for the night , Noah ? ” she ask , after they have walk a few hundred yard .
“ How should I know ? ” reply Noah , whose temper have be considerably impair by walk .
“ Near , I hope , ” say Charlotte .
“ No , not near , ” reply Mr. Claypole .
“ There !
Not near ; so don ’ t think it. ” “ Why not ? ” “ When I tell yer that I don ’ t mean to do a thing , that ’ s enough , without any why or because either , ” reply Mr. Claypole with dignity .
“ Well , you needn ’ t be so cross , ” say his companion .
“ A pretty thing it would be , wouldn ’ t it to go and stop at the very first public-house outside the town , so that Sowerberry , if he come up after u , might poke in his old nose , and have u take back in a cart with handcuff on , ” say Mr. Claypole in a jeering tone .
“ No !
I shall go and lose myself among the narrow street I can find , and not stop till we come to the very out-of-the-way house I can set eye on .
“ Cod , yer may thank yer star I ’ ve get a head ; for if we hadn ’ t go , at first , the wrong road a purpose , and come back across country , yer ’ d have be lock up hard and fast a week ago , my lady .
And serve yer right for be a fool. ” “ I know I ain ’ t as cunning a you be , ” reply Charlotte ; “ but don ’ t put all the blame on me , and say I should have be lock up .
You would have be if I have be , any way. ” “ Yer take the money from the till , yer know yer do , ” say Mr. Claypole .
“ I take it for you , Noah , dear , ” rejoin Charlotte .
“ Did I keep it ? ” ask Mr. Claypole .
“ No ; you trust in me , and let me carry it like a dear , and so you be , ” say the lady , chuck him under the chin , and draw her arm through his .
This be indeed the case ; but a it be not Mr. Claypole ’ s habit to repose a blind and foolish confidence in anybody , it should be observe , in justice to that gentleman , that he have trust Charlotte to this extent , in order that , if they be pursue , the money might be find on her : which would leave him an opportunity of assert his innocence of any theft , and would greatly facilitate his chance of escape .
Of course , he enter at this juncture , into no explanation of his motif , and they walk on very lovingly together .
In pursuance of this cautious plan , Mr. Claypole go on , without halt , until he arrive at the Angel at Islington , where he wisely judge , from the crowd of passenger and number of vehicle , that London begin in earnest .
Just pause to observe which appear the most crowded street , and consequently the most to be avoid , he cross into Saint John ’ s Road , and be soon deep in the obscurity of the intricate and dirty way , which , lie between Gray ’ s Inn Lane and Smithfield , render that part of the town one of the low and bad that improvement have leave in the midst of London .
Through these street , Noah Claypole walk , drag Charlotte after him ; now step into the kennel to embrace at a glance the whole external character of some small public-house ; now jog on again , a some fancied appearance induce him to believe it too public for his purpose .
At length , he stop in front of one , more humble in appearance and more dirty than any he have yet see ; and , have cross over and survey it from the opposite pavement , graciously announce his intention of put up there , for the night .
“ So give u the bundle , ” say Noah , unstrapping it from the woman ’ s shoulder , and sling it over his own ; “ and don ’ t yer speak , except when yer speak to .
What ’ s the name of the house—t-h-r—three what ? ” “ Cripples , ” say Charlotte .
“ Three Cripples , ” repeat Noah , “ and a very good sign too .
Now , then !
Keep close at my heel , and come along. ” With these injunction , he push the rattle door with his shoulder , and enter the house , follow by his companion .
There be nobody in the bar but a young Jew , who , with his two elbow on the counter , be read a dirty newspaper .
He star very hard at Noah , and Noah star very hard at him .
If Noah have be attire in his charity-boy ’ s dress , there might have be some reason for the Jew open his eye so wide ; but a he have discard the coat and badge , and wear a short smock-frock over his leather , there seem no particular reason for his appearance excite so much attention in a public-house .
“ Is this the Three Cripples ? ” ask Noah .
“ That be the dabe of this ’ ouse , ” reply the Jew .
“ A gentleman we meet on the road , come up from the country , recommend u here , ” say Noah , nudge Charlotte , perhaps to call her attention to this most ingenious device for attract respect , and perhaps to warn her to betray no surprise .
“ We want to sleep here to-night. ” “ I ’ b dot certaid you cad , ” say Barney , who be the attendant sprite ; “ but I ’ ll idquire. ” “ Show u the tap , and give u a bit of cold meat and a drop of beer while yer inquiring , will yer ? ” say Noah .
Barney comply by usher them into a small back-room , and set the required viand before them ; have do which , he inform the traveller that they could be lodge that night , and leave the amiable couple to their refreshment .
Now , this back-room be immediately behind the bar , and some step low , so that any person connect with the house , undrawing a small curtain which conceal a single pane of glass fix in the wall of the last-named apartment , about five foot from it flooring , could not only look down upon any guest in the back-room without any great hazard of be observe ( the glass be in a dark angle of the wall , between which and a large upright beam the observer have to thrust himself ) , but could , by apply his ear to the partition , ascertain with tolerable distinctness , their subject of conversation .
The landlord of the house have not withdraw his eye from this place of espial for five minute , and Barney have only just return from make the communication above relate , when Fagin , in the course of his even ’ s business , come into the bar to inquire after some of his young pupil .
“ Hush ! ” say Barney : “ stradegers id the next roob. ” “ Strangers ! ” repeat the old man in a whisper .
“ Ah !
Ad rub uds too , ” add Barney .
“ Frob the cuttry , but subthig in your way , or I ’ b bistaked. ” Fagin appear to receive this communication with great interest .
Mounting a stool , he cautiously apply his eye to the pane of glass , from which secret post he could see Mr. Claypole take cold beef from the dish , and porter from the pot , and administer homeopathic dos of both to Charlotte , who sit patiently by , eat and drinking at his pleasure .
“ Aha ! ” he whisper , look round to Barney , “ I like that fellow ’ s look .
He ’ d be of use to u ; he know how to train the girl already .
Don ’ t make as much noise a a mouse , my dear , and let me hear ’ em talk—let me hear ’ em. ” He again apply his eye to the glass , and turn his ear to the partition , listen attentively : with a subtle and eager look upon his face , that might have appertain to some old goblin .
“ So I mean to be a gentleman , ” say Mr. Claypole , kick out his leg , and continue a conversation , the commencement of which Fagin have arrive too late to hear .
“ No more jolly old coffin , Charlotte , but a gentleman ’ s life for me : and , if yer like , yer shall be a lady. ” “ I should like that well enough , dear , ” reply Charlotte ; “ but till ain ’ t to be empty every day , and people to get clear off after it. ” “ Tills be blow ! ” say Mr. Claypole ; “ there ’ s more thing besides till to be emptied. ” “ What do you mean ? ” ask his companion .
“ Pockets , woman ’ s ridicule , house , mail-coaches , bank ! ” say Mr. Claypole , rise with the porter .
“ But you can ’ t do all that , dear , ” say Charlotte .
“ I shall look out to get into company with them a can , ” replied Noah .
“ They ’ ll be able to make u useful some way or another .
Why , you yourself be worth fifty woman ; I never see such a precious sly and deceitful creetur a yer can be when I let yer. ” “ Lor , how nice it be to hear yer say so ! ” exclaim Charlotte , imprint a kiss upon his ugly face .
“ There , that ’ ll do : don ’ t yer be too affectionate , in case I ’ m cross with yer , ” say Noah , disengage himself with great gravity .
“ I should like to be the captain of some band , and have the whopping of ’ em , and follering ’ em about , unbeknown to themselves .
That would suit me , if there be good profit ; and if we could only get in with some gentleman of this sort , I say it would be cheap at that twenty-pound note you ’ ve get , —especially a we don ’ t very well know how to get rid of it ourselves. ” After express this opinion , Mr. Claypole look into the porter-pot with an aspect of deep wisdom ; and have well shake it content , nod condescendingly to Charlotte , and take a draught , wherewith he appear greatly refresh .
He be meditate another , when the sudden opening of the door , and the appearance of a stranger , interrupt him .
The stranger be Mr. Fagin .
And very amiable he look , and a very low bow he make , a he advance , and set himself down at the near table , order something to drink of the grin Barney .
“ A pleasant night , sir , but cool for the time of year , ” say Fagin , rub his hand .
“ From the country , I see , sir ? ” “ How do yer see that ? ” ask Noah Claypole .
“ We have not so much dust a that in London , ” reply Fagin , point from Noah ’ s shoe to those of his companion , and from them to the two bundle .
“ Yer a sharp feller , ” say Noah .
“ Ha !
ha !
only hear that , Charlotte ! ” “ Why , one need be sharp in this town , my dear , ” reply the Jew , sink his voice to a confidential whisper ; “ and that ’ s the truth. ” Fagin follow up this remark by strike the side of his nose with his right forefinger , —a gesture which Noah attempt to imitate , though not with complete success , in consequence of his own nose not be large enough for the purpose .
However , Mr. Fagin seem to interpret the endeavour a express a perfect coincidence with his opinion , and put about the liquor which Barney reappear with , in a very friendly manner .
“ Good stuff that , ” observe Mr. Claypole , smack his lip .
“ Dear ! ” say Fagin .
“ A man need be always empty a till , or a pocket , or a woman ’ s reticule , or a house , or a mail-coach , or a bank , if he drink it regularly. ” Mr. Claypole no sooner heard this extract from his own remark than he fell back in his chair , and look from the Jew to Charlotte with a countenance of ashy paleness and excessive terror .
“ Don ’ t mind me , my dear , ” say Fagin , draw his chair closer .
“ Ha !
ha !
it be lucky it be only me that heard you by chance .
It be very lucky it be only me. ” “ I didn ’ t take it , ” stammer Noah , no longer stretch out his leg like an independent gentleman , but coil them up as well a he could under his chair ; “ it be all her do ; yer ’ ve get it now , Charlotte , yer know yer have. ” “ No matter who ’ s get it , or who do it , my dear , ” reply Fagin , glancing , nevertheless , with a hawk ’ s eye at the girl and the two bundle .
“ I ’ m in that way myself , and I like you for it. ” “ In what way ? ” ask Mr. Claypole , a little recovering .
“ In that way of business , ” rejoin Fagin ; “ and so be the people of the house .
You ’ ve hit the right nail upon the head , and be a safe here a you could be .
There be not a safer place in all this town than be the Cripples ; that be , when I like to make it so .
And I have take a fancy to you and the young woman ; so I ’ ve say the word , and you may make your mind easy. ” Noah Claypole ’ s mind might have be at ease after this assurance , but his body certainly be not ; for he shuffle and writhe about , into various uncouth position : eye his new friend meanwhile with mingle fear and suspicion .
“ I ’ ll tell you more , ” say Fagin , after he have reassure the girl , by dint of friendly nod and mutter encouragement .
“ I have get a friend that I think can gratify your darling wish , and put you in the right way , where you can take whatever department of the business you think will suit you best at first , and be teach all the others. ” “ Yer speak a if yer be in earnest , ” reply Noah .
“ What advantage would it be to me to be anything else ? ” inquire Fagin , shrug his shoulder .
“ Here !
Let me have a word with you outside. ” “ There ’ s no occasion to trouble ourselves to move , ” say Noah , get his leg by gradual degree abroad again .
“ She ’ ll take the luggage upstairs the while .
Charlotte , see to them bundles. ” This mandate , which have be deliver with great majesty , be obey without the slight demur ; and Charlotte make the best of her way off with the package while Noah hold the door open and watch her out .
“ She ’ s kept tolerably well under , ain ’ t she ? ” he ask a he resume his seat : in the tone of a keeper who have tame some wild animal .
“ Quite perfect , ” rejoin Fagin , clap him on the shoulder .
“ You ’ re a genius , my dear. ” “ Why , I suppose if I wasn ’ t , I shouldn ’ t be here , ” reply Noah .
“ But , I say , she ’ ll be back if yer lose time. ” “ Now , what do you think ? ” say Fagin .
“ If you be to like my friend , could you do good than join him ? ” “ Is he in a good way of business ; that ’ s where it be ! ” respond Noah , wink one of his little eye .
“ The top of the tree ; employ a power of hand ; have the very best society in the profession. ” “ Regular town-maders ? ” ask Mr. Claypole .
“ Not a countryman among ’ em ; and I don ’ t think he ’ d take you , even on my recommendation , if he didn ’ t run rather short of assistant just now , ” reply Fagin .
“ Should I have to hand over ? ” say Noah , slap his breeches-pocket .
“ It couldn ’ t possibly be do without , ” reply Fagin , in a most decided manner .
“ Twenty pound , though—it ’ s a lot of money ! ” “ Not when it ’ s in a note you can ’ t get rid of , ” retort Fagin .
“ Number and date take , I suppose ?
Payment stop at the Bank ?
Ah !
It ’ s not worth much to him .
It ’ ll have to go abroad , and he couldn ’ t sell it for a great deal in the market. ” “ When could I see him ? ” ask Noah doubtfully .
“ To-morrow morning. ” “ Where ? ” “ Here. ” “ Um ! ” say Noah .
“ What ’ s the wage ? ” “ Live like a gentleman—board and lodging , pipe and spirit free—half of all you earn , and half of all the young woman earn , ” reply Mr. Fagin .
Whether Noah Claypole , whose rapacity be none of the least comprehensive , would have accede even to these glow term , have he be a perfectly free agent , be very doubtful ; but a he recollect that , in the event of his refusal , it be in the power of his new acquaintance to give him up to justice immediately ( and more unlikely thing have come to pass ) , he gradually relent , and say he think that would suit him .
“ But , yer see , ” observe Noah , “ a she will be able to do a good deal , I should like to take something very light. ” “ A little fancy work ? ” suggest Fagin .
“ Ah !
something of that sort , ” reply Noah .
“ What do you think would suit me now ?
Something not too try for the strength , and not very dangerous , you know .
That ’ s the sort of thing ! ” “ I hear you talk of something in the spy way upon the others , my dear , ” say Fagin .
“ My friend want somebody who would do that well , very much. ” “ Why , I do mention that , and I shouldn ’ t mind turn my hand to it sometimes , ” rejoin Mr. Claypole slowly ; “ but it wouldn ’ t pay by itself , you know. ” “ That ’ s true ! ” observe the Jew , ruminate or pretend to ruminate .
“ No , it might not. ” “ What do you think , then ? ” ask Noah , anxiously regard him .
“ Something in the sneaking way , where it be pretty sure work , and not much more risk than be at home. ” “ What do you think of the old lady ? ” ask Fagin .
“ There ’ s a good deal of money make in snatch their bag and parcel , and run round the corner. ” “ Don ’ t they holler out a good deal , and scratch sometimes ? ” ask Noah , shake his head .
“ I don ’ t think that would answer my purpose .
Ain ’ t there any other line open ? ” “ Stop ! ” say Fagin , lay his hand on Noah ’ s knee .
“ The kinchin lay. ” “ What ’ s that ? ” demand Mr. Claypole .
“ The kinchins , my dear , ” say Fagin , “ be the young child that ’ s sent on errand by their mother , with sixpence and shilling ; and the lay be just to take their money away—they ’ ve always get it ready in their hand , —then knock ’ em into the kennel , and walk off very slow , a if there be nothing else the matter but a child fall down and hurt itself .
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” “ Ha !
ha ! ” roar Mr. Claypole , kick up his leg in an ecstasy .
“ Lord , that ’ s the very thing ! ” “ To be sure it be , ” reply Fagin ; “ and you can have a few good beat chalk out in Camden Town , and Battle Bridge , and neighborhood like that , where they ’ re always go errand ; and you can upset a many kinchins a you want , any hour in the day .
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” With this , Fagin poke Mr. Claypole in the side , and they join in a burst of laughter both long and loud .
“ Well , that ’ s all right ! ” say Noah , when he have recover himself , and Charlotte have return .
“ What time to-morrow shall we say ? ” “ Will ten do ? ” ask Fagin , add , a Mr. Claypole nod assent , “ What name shall I tell my good friend. ” “ Mr .
Bolter , ” reply Noah , who have prepare himself for such emergency .
“ Mr .
Morris Bolter .
This be Mrs. Bolter. ” “ Mrs .
Bolter ’ s humble servant , ” say Fagin , bow with grotesque politeness .
“ I hope I shall know her good very shortly. ” “ Do you hear the gentleman , Charlotte ? ” thunder Mr. Claypole .
“ Yes , Noah , dear ! ” reply Mrs. Bolter , extend her hand .
“ She call me Noah , a a sort of fond way of talk , ” say Mr. Morris Bolter , late Claypole , turn to Fagin .
“ You understand ? ” “ Oh yes , I understand—perfectly , ” reply Fagin , tell the truth for once .
“ Good-night !
Good-night ! ” With many adieu and good wish , Mr. Fagin go his way .
Noah Claypole , bespeak his good lady ’ s attention , proceed to enlighten her relative to the arrangement he have make , with all that haughtiness and air of superiority , become , not only a member of the sterner sex , but a gentleman who appreciate the dignity of a special appointment on the kinchin lay , in London and it vicinity .
CHAPTER XLIII .
WHEREIN IS SHOWN HOW THE ARTFUL DODGER GOT INTO TROUBLE “ And so it be you that be your own friend , be it ? ” ask Mr. Claypole , otherwise Bolter , when , by virtue of the compact enter into between them , he have remove next day to Fagin ’ s house .
“ Cod , I think as much last night ! ” “ Every man ’ s his own friend , my dear , ” reply Fagin , with his most insinuating grin .
“ He hasn ’ t a good a one a himself anywhere. ” “ Except sometimes , ” reply Morris Bolter , assume the air of a man of the world .
“ Some people be nobody ’ s enemy but their own , yer know. ” “ Don ’ t believe that , ” say Fagin .
“ When a man ’ s his own enemy , it ’ s only because he ’ s too much his own friend ; not because he ’ s careful for everybody but himself .
Pooh !
pooh !
There ain ’ t such a thing in nature. ” “ There oughn ’ t to be , if there be , ” reply Mr. Bolter .
“ That stand to reason .
Some conjurer say that number three be the magic number , and some say number seven .
It ’ s neither , my friend , neither .
It ’ s number one .
“ Ha !
ha ! ” cry Mr. Bolter .
“ Number one for ever. ” “ In a little community like ours , my dear , ” say Fagin , who felt it necessary to qualify this position , “ we have a general number one , without consider me too a the same , and all the other young people. ” “ Oh , the devil ! ” exclaim Mr. Bolter .
“ You see , ” pursue Fagin , affect to disregard this interruption , “ we be so mixed up together , and identify in our interest , that it must be so .
For instance , it ’ s your object to take care of number one—meaning yourself. ” “ Certainly , ” reply Mr. Bolter .
“ Yer about right there. ” “ Well !
You can ’ t take care of yourself , number one , without take care of me , number one. ” “ Number two , you mean , ” say Mr. Bolter , who be largely endow with the quality of selfishness .
“ No , I don ’ t ! ” retort Fagin .
“ I ’ m of the same importance to you , a you be to yourself. ” “ I say , ” interrupt Mr. Bolter , “ yer a very nice man , and I ’ m very fond of yer ; but we ain ’ t quite so thick together , a all that come to. ” “ Only think , ” say Fagin , shrug his shoulder , and stretch out his hand ; “ only consider .
You ’ ve do what ’ s a very pretty thing , and what I love you for do ; but what at the same time would put the cravat round your throat , that ’ s so very easily tie and so very difficult to unloose—in plain English , the halter ! ” Mr. Bolter put his hand to his neckerchief , a if he felt it inconveniently tight ; and murmur an assent , qualify in tone but not in substance .
“ The gallows , ” continue Fagin , “ the gallows , my dear , be an ugly finger-post , which point out a very short and sharp turning that have stop many a bold fellow ’ s career on the broad highway .
To keep in the easy road , and keep it at a distance , be object number one with you. ” “ Of course it be , ” reply Mr. Bolter .
“ What do yer talk about such thing for ? ” “ Only to show you my mean clearly , ” say the Jew , raise his eyebrow .
“ To be able to do that , you depend upon me .
To keep my little business all snug , I depend upon you .
The first be your number one , the second my number one .
The more you value your number one , the more careful you must be of mine ; so we come at last to what I tell you at first—that a regard for number one hold u all together , and must do so , unless we would all go to piece in company. ” “ That ’ s true , ” rejoin Mr. Bolter , thoughtfully .
“ Oh !
yer a cunning old codger ! ” Mr. Fagin saw , with delight , that this tribute to his power be no mere compliment , but that he have really impress his recruit with a sense of his wily genius , which it be most important that he should entertain in the outset of their acquaintance .
To strengthen an impression so desirable and useful , he follow up the blow by acquaint him , in some detail , with the magnitude and extent of his operation ; blend truth and fiction together , a best serve his purpose ; and bring both to bear , with so much art , that Mr. Bolter ’ s respect visibly increase , and become temper , at the same time , with a degree of wholesome fear , which it be highly desirable to awaken .
“ It ’ s this mutual trust we have in each other that console me under heavy loss , ” say Fagin .
“ My best hand be take from me , yesterday morning. ” “ You don ’ t mean to say he die ? ” cry Mr. Bolter .
“ No , no , ” reply Fagin , “ not so bad a that .
Not quite so bad. ” “ What , I suppose he was— ” “ Wanted , ” interpose Fagin .
“ Yes , he be wanted. ” “ Very particular ? ” inquire Mr. Bolter .
“ No , ” reply Fagin , “ not very .
He be charge with attempt to pick a pocket , and they find a silver snuff-box on him , —his own , my dear , his own , for he take snuff himself , and be very fond of it .
They remand him till to-day , for they think they know the owner .
Ah !
he be worth fifty box , and I ’ d give the price of a many to have him back .
You should have know the Dodger , my dear ; you should have know the Dodger. ” “ Well , but I shall know him , I hope ; don ’ t yer think so ? ” say Mr. Bolter .
“ I ’ m doubtful about it , ” reply Fagin , with a sigh .
“ If they don ’ t get any fresh evidence , it ’ ll only be a summary conviction , and we shall have him back again after six week or so ; but , if they do , it ’ s a case of lagging .
They know what a clever lad he be ; he ’ ll be a lifer .
They ’ ll make the Artful nothing less than a lifer. ” “ What do you mean by lag and a lifer ? ” demand Mr. Bolter .
“ What ’ s the good of talk in that way to me ; why don ’ t yer speak so a I can understand yer ? ” Fagin be about to translate these mysterious expression into the vulgar tongue ; and , be interpret , Mr. Bolter would have be inform that they represent that combination of word , “ transportation for life , ” when the dialogue be cut short by the entry of Master Bates , with his hand in his breeches-pockets , and his face twist into a look of semi-comical woe .
“ It ’ s all up , Fagin , ” say Charley , when he and his new companion have be make know to each other .
“ What do you mean ? ” “ They ’ ve find the gentleman a own the box ; two or three more ’ s a come to ’ dentify him ; and the Artful ’ s book for a passage out , ” reply Master Bates .
“ I must have a full suit of mourning , Fagin , and a hatband , to wisit him in , afore he set out upon his travel .
To think of Jack Dawkins—lummy Jack—the Dodger—the Artful Dodger—going abroad for a common twopenny-halfpenny sneeze-box !
I never think he ’ d a do it under a gold watch , chain , and seal , at the low .
Oh , why didn ’ t he rob some rich old gentleman of all his walables , and go out a a gentleman , and not like a common prig , without no honour nor glory ! ” With this expression of feel for his unfortunate friend , Master Bates sit himself on the near chair with an aspect of chagrin and despondency .
“ What do you talk about his have neither honour nor glory for ! ” exclaim Fagin , dart an angry look at his pupil .
“ Wasn ’ t he always the top-sawyer among you all !
Is there one of you that could touch him or come near him on any scent !
Eh ? ” “ Not one , ” reply Master Bates , in a voice render husky by regret ; “ not one. ” “ Then what do you talk of ? ” reply Fagin angrily ; “ what be you blubber for ? ” “ ’ Cause it isn ’ t on the rec-ord , be it ? ” say Charley , chafe into perfect defiance of his venerable friend by the current of his regret ; “ ’ cause it can ’ t come out in the ’ dictment ; ’ cause nobody will never know half of what he be .
How will he stand in the Newgate Calendar ?
P ’ rap not be there at all .
Oh , my eye , my eye , wot a blow it be ! ” “ Ha !
ha ! ” cry Fagin , extend his right hand , and turn to Mr. Bolter in a fit of chuckle which shake him a though he have the palsy ; “ see what a pride they take in their profession , my dear .
Ain ’ t it beautiful ? ” Mr. Bolter nod assent , and Fagin , after contemplate the grief of Charley Bates for some second with evident satisfaction , step up to that young gentleman and pat him on the shoulder .
“ Never mind , Charley , ” say Fagin soothingly ; “ it ’ ll come out , it ’ ll be sure to come out .
They ’ ll all know what a clever fellow he be ; he ’ ll show it himself , and not disgrace his old pal and teacher .
Think how young he be too !
What a distinction , Charley , to be lag at his time of life ! ” “ Well , it be a honour that be ! ” say Charley , a little consoled .
“ He shall have all he want , ” continue the Jew .
“ He shall be keep in the Stone Jug , Charley , like a gentleman .
Like a gentleman !
With his beer every day , and money in his pocket to pitch and toss with , if he can ’ t spend it. ” “ No , shall he though ? ” cry Charley Bates .
“ Ay , that he shall , ” replied Fagin , “ and we ’ ll have a big-wig , Charley : one that ’ s get the great gift of the gab : to carry on his defence ; and he shall make a speech for himself too , if he like ; and we ’ ll read it all in the papers— ‘ Artful Dodger—shrieks of laughter—here the court be convulse ’ —eh , Charley , eh ? ” “ Ha !
ha ! ” laugh Master Bates , “ what a lark that would be , wouldn ’ t it , Fagin ?
I say , how the Artful would bother ’ em wouldn ’ t he ? ” “ Would ! ” cried Fagin .
“ He shall—he will ! ” “ Ah , to be sure , so he will , ” repeat Charley , rub his hand .
“ I think I see him now , ” cry the Jew , bend his eye upon his pupil .
“ So do I , ” cry Charley Bates .
“ Ha !
ha !
ha !
so do I. I see it all afore me , upon my soul I do , Fagin .
What a game !
What a regular game !
All the big-wigs try to look solemn , and Jack Dawkins address of ’ em a intimate and comfortable a if he be the judge ’ s own son make a speech arter dinner—ha !
ha !
ha ! ” In fact , Mr. Fagin have so well humour his young friend ’ s eccentric disposition , that Master Bates , who have at first be dispose to consider the imprisoned Dodger rather in the light of a victim , now look upon him a the chief actor in a scene of most uncommon and exquisite humour , and felt quite impatient for the arrival of the time when his old companion should have so favourable an opportunity of display his ability .
“ We must know how he get on to-day , by some handy mean or other , ” say Fagin .
“ Let me think. ” “ Shall I go ? ” ask Charley .
“ Not for the world , ” reply Fagin .
“ Are you mad , my dear , stark mad , that you ’ d walk into the very place where—No , Charley , no .
One be enough to lose at a time. ” “ You don ’ t mean to go yourself , I suppose ? ” say Charley with a humorous leer .
“ That wouldn ’ t quite fit , ” reply Fagin shake his head .
“ Then why don ’ t you send this new cove ? ” ask Master Bates , lay his hand on Noah ’ s arm .
“ Nobody know him. ” “ Why , if he didn ’ t mind— ” observe Fagin .
“ Mind ! ” interpose Charley .
“ What should he have to mind ? ” “ Really nothing , my dear , ” say Fagin , turn to Mr. Bolter , “ really nothing. ” “ Oh , I dare say about that , yer know , ” observe Noah , back towards the door , and shake his head with a kind of sober alarm .
“ No , no—none of that .
It ’ s not in my department , that ain ’ t. ” “ Wot department have he get , Fagin ? ” inquire Master Bates , survey Noah ’ s lank form with much disgust .
“ The cut away when there ’ s anything wrong , and the eat all the wittles when there ’ s everything right ; be that his branch ? ” “ Never mind , ” retort Mr. Bolter ; “ and don ’ t yer take liberty with yer superior , little boy , or yer ’ ll find yerself in the wrong shop. ” Master Bates laugh so vehemently at this magnificent threat , that it be some time before Fagin could interpose , and represent to Mr. Bolter that he incur no possible danger in visit the police-office ; that , inasmuch a no account of the little affair in which he have engage , nor any description of his person , have yet be forward to the metropolis , it be very probable that he be not even suspect of have resort to it for shelter ; and that , if he be properly disguise , it would be a safe a spot for him to visit a any in London , inasmuch a it would be , of all place , the very last , to which he could be suppose likely to resort of his own free will .
Persuaded , in part , by these representation , but overborne in a much great degree by his fear of Fagin , Mr. Bolter at length consent , with a very bad grace , to undertake the expedition .
By Fagin ’ s direction , he immediately substitute for his own attire , a waggoner ’ s frock , velveteen breech , and leather legging : all of which article the Jew have at hand .
He be likewise furnish with a felt hat well garnish with turnpike ticket ; and a carter ’ s whip .
Thus equip , he be to saunter into the office , a some country fellow from Covent Garden market might be suppose to do for the gratification of his curiousity ; and a he be a awkward , ungainly , and raw-boned a fellow a need be , Mr. Fagin have no fear but that he would look the part to perfection .
These arrangement complete , he be inform of the necessary sign and token by which to recognise the Artful Dodger , and be convey by Master Bates through dark and wind way to within a very short distance of Bow Street .
Having describe the precise situation of the office , and accompany it with copious direction how he be to walk straight up the passage , and when he get into the side , and pull off his hat a he go into the room , Charley Bates bid him hurry on alone , and promise to bide his return on the spot of their parting .
Noah Claypole , or Morris Bolter a the reader plea , punctually follow the direction he have receive , which—Master Bates be pretty well acquaint with the locality—were so exact that he be enable to gain the magisterial presence without ask any question , or meet with any interruption by the way .
He find himself jostle among a crowd of people , chiefly woman , who be huddle together in a dirty frowsy room , at the upper end of which be a raised platform rail off from the rest , with a dock for the prisoner on the left hand against the wall , a box for the witness in the middle , and a desk for the magistrate on the right ; the awful locality last name , be screen off by a partition which conceal the bench from the common gaze , and leave the vulgar to imagine ( if they could ) the full majesty of justice .
There be only a couple of woman in the dock , who be nod to their admiring friend , while the clerk read some deposition to a couple of policeman and a man in plain clothes who lean over the table .
A jailer stand recline against the dock-rail , tap his nose listlessly with a large key , except when he repress an undue tendency to conversation among the idler , by proclaim silence ; or look sternly up to bid some woman “ Take that baby out , ” when the gravity of justice be disturb by feeble cry , half-smothered in the mother ’ s shawl , from some meagre infant .
The room smelt close and unwholesome ; the wall be dirt-discoloured ; and the ceiling blacken .
There be an old smoky bust over the mantel-shelf , and a dusty clock above the dock—the only thing present , that seem to go on a it ought ; for depravity , or poverty , or an habitual acquaintance with both , have leave a taint on all the animate matter , hardly less unpleasant than the thick greasy scum on every inanimate object that frown upon it .
Noah look eagerly about him for the Dodger ; but although there be several woman who would have do very well for that distinguish character ’ s mother or sister , and more than one man who might be suppose to bear a strong resemblance to his father , nobody at all answer the description give him of Mr. Dawkins be to be see .
He wait in a state of much suspense and uncertainty until the woman , be commit for trial , go flaunt out ; and then be quickly relieve by the appearance of another prisoner who he felt at once could be no other than the object of his visit .
It be indeed Mr. Dawkins , who , shuffle into the office with the big coat sleeve tuck up as usual , his left hand in his pocket , and his hat in his right hand , precede the jailer , with a roll gait altogether indescribable , and , take his place in the dock , request in an audible voice to know what he be place in that ’ ere disgraceful sitivation for .
“ Hold your tongue , will you ? ” say the jailer .
“ I ’ m an Englishman , ain ’ t I ? ” rejoin the Dodger .
“ Where be my priwileges ? ” “ You ’ ll get your privilege soon enough , ” retort the jailer , “ and pepper with ’ em. ” “ We ’ ll see wot the Secretary of State for the Home Affairs have get to say to the beak , if I don ’ t , ” reply Mr. Dawkins .
“ Now then !
Wot be this here business ?
I shall thank the madg ’ strates to dispose of this here little affair , and not to keep me while they read the paper , for I ’ ve get an appointment with a genelman in the City , and a I be a man of my word and wery punctual in business matter , he ’ ll go away if I ain ’ t there to my time , and then pr ’ aps ther win ’ t be an action for damage against them a kep me away .
Oh no , certainly not ! ” At this point , the Dodger , with a show of be very particular with a view to proceeding to be have thereafter , desire the jailer to communicate “ the name of them two file a be on the bench. ” Which so tickle the spectator , that they laugh almost as heartily a Master Bates could have do if he have hear the request .
“ Silence there ! ” cry the jailer .
“ What be this ? ” inquire one of the magistrate .
“ A pick-pocketing case , your worship. ” “ Has the boy ever be here before ? ” “ He ought to have be , a many time , ” reply the jailer .
“ He have be pretty well everywhere else .
_I_ know him well , your worship. ” “ Oh !
you know me , do you ? ” cry the Artful , make a note of the statement .
“ Wery good .
That ’ s a case of deformation of character , any way. ” Here there be another laugh , and another cry of silence .
“ Now then , where be the witness ? ” say the clerk .
“ Ah !
that ’ s right , ” add the Dodger .
“ Where be they ?
I should like to see ’ em. ” This wish be immediately gratify , for a policeman step forward who have see the prisoner attempt the pocket of an unknown gentleman in a crowd , and indeed take a handkerchief therefrom , which , be a very old one , he deliberately put back again , after try it on his own countenance .
For this reason , he take the Dodger into custody as soon a he could get near him , and the say Dodger , be search , have upon his person a silver snuff-box , with the owner ’ s name engrave upon the lid .
This gentleman have be discover on reference to the Court Guide , and be then and there present , swore that the snuff-box be his , and that he have miss it on the previous day , the moment he have disengage himself from the crowd before refer to .
He have also remark a young gentleman in the throng , particularly active in make his way about , and that young gentleman be the prisoner before him .
“ Have you anything to ask this witness , boy ? ” say the magistrate .
“ I wouldn ’ t abase myself by descend to hold no conversation with him , ” reply the Dodger .
“ Have you anything to say at all ? ” “ Do you hear his worship ask if you ’ ve anything to say ? ” inquire the jailer , nudge the silent Dodger with his elbow .
“ I beg your pardon , ” say the Dodger , look up with an air of abstraction .
“ Did you redress yourself to me , my man ? ” “ I never see such an out-and-out young wagabond , your worship , ” observe the officer with a grin .
“ Do you mean to say anything , you young shaver ? ” “ No , ” reply the Dodger , “ not here , for this ain ’ t the shop for justice : besides which , my attorney be a-breakfasting this morning with the Wice President of the House of Commons ; but I shall have something to say elsewhere , and so will he , and so will a wery numerous and ’ spectable circle of acquaintance a ’ ll make them beak wish they ’ d never be bear , or that they ’ d get their footman to hang ’ em up to their own hat-pegs , afore they let ’ em come out this morning to try it on upon me .
I ’ ll— ” “ There !
He ’ s fully commit ! ” interpose the clerk .
“ Take him away. ” “ Come on , ” say the jailer .
“ Oh ah !
I ’ ll come on , ” reply the Dodger , brush his hat with the palm of his hand .
“ Ah !
( to the Bench ) it ’ s no use your look frighten ; I win ’ t show you no mercy , not a ha ’ porth of it .
_You ’ ll_ pay for this , my fine feller .
I wouldn ’ t be you for something !
I wouldn ’ t go free , now , if you be to fall down on your knee and ask me .
Here , carry me off to prison !
Take me away ! ” With these last word , the Dodger suffer himself to be lead off by the collar ; threatening , till he get into the yard , to make a parliamentary business of it ; and then grin in the officer ’ s face , with great glee and self-approval .
Having see him lock up by himself in a little cell , Noah make the best of his way back to where he have leave Master Bates .
After wait here some time , he be join by that young gentleman , who have prudently abstain from show himself until he have look carefully abroad from a snug retreat , and ascertain that his new friend have not be follow by any impertinent person .
The two hasten back together , to bear to Mr. Fagin the animate news that the Dodger be do full justice to his bringing-up , and establish for himself a glorious reputation .
CHAPTER XLIV .
THE TIME ARRIVES FOR NANCY TO REDEEM HER PLEDGE TO ROSE MAYLIE .
SHE FAILS .
Adept a she be , in all the art of cunning and dissimulation , the girl Nancy could not wholly conceal the effect which the knowledge of the step she have take , wrought upon her mind .
She remember that both the crafty Jew and the brutal Sikes have confide to her scheme , which have be hide from all others : in the full confidence that she be trustworthy and beyond the reach of their suspicion .
Vile a those scheme be , desperate a be their originator , and bitter a be her feeling towards Fagin , who have lead her , step by step , deep and deep down into an abyss of crime and misery , whence be no escape ; still , there be time when , even towards him , she felt some relenting , lest her disclosure should bring him within the iron grasp he have so long eluded , and he should fall at last—richly a he merit such a fate—by her hand .
But , these be the mere wandering of a mind unable wholly to detach itself from old companion and association , though enable to fix itself steadily on one object , and resolve not to be turn aside by any consideration .
Her fear for Sikes would have be more powerful inducement to recoil while there be yet time ; but she have stipulate that her secret should be rigidly keep , she have drop no clue which could lead to his discovery , she have refuse , even for his sake , a refuge from all the guilt and wretchedness that encompass her—and what more could she do !
She be resolve .
Though all her mental struggle terminate in this conclusion , they force themselves upon her , again and again , and leave their trace too .
She grow pale and thin , even within a few day .
At time , she take no heed of what be pass before her , or no part in conversation where once , she would have be the loud .
At other time , she laugh without merriment , and be noisy without a moment afterwards—she sit silent and dejected , brood with her head upon her hand , while the very effort by which she rouse herself , tell , more forcibly than even these indication , that she be ill at ease , and that her thought be occupy with matter very different and distant from those in the course of discussion by her companion .
It be Sunday night , and the bell of the near church strike the hour .
Sikes and the Jew be talk , but they pause to listen .
The girl look up from the low seat on which she crouch , and listen too .
Eleven .
“ An hour this side of midnight , ” say Sikes , raise the blind to look out and return to his seat .
“ Dark and heavy it be too .
A good night for business this. ” “ Ah ! ” reply Fagin .
“ What a pity , Bill , my dear , that there ’ s none quite ready to be done. ” “ You ’ re right for once , ” reply Sikes gruffly .
“ It be a pity , for I ’ m in the humour too. ” Fagin sigh , and shake his head despondingly .
“ We must make up for lose time when we ’ ve get thing into a good train .
That ’ s all I know , ” say Sikes .
“ That ’ s the way to talk , my dear , ” reply Fagin , venture to pat him on the shoulder .
“ It do me good to hear you. ” “ Does you good , do it ! ” cry Sikes .
“ Well , so be it. ” “ Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” laugh Fagin , a if he be relieve by even this concession .
“ You ’ re like yourself to-night , Bill .
Quite like yourself. ” “ I don ’ t feel like myself when you lay that wither old claw on my shoulder , so take it away , ” say Sikes , cast off the Jew ’ s hand .
“ It make you nervous , Bill , —reminds you of be nab , do it ? ” say Fagin , determine not to be offend .
“ Reminds me of be nab by the devil , ” return Sikes .
“ There never be another man with such a face a yours , unless it be your father , and I suppose _he_ be singe his grizzled red beard by this time , unless you come straight from the old ’ un without any father at all betwixt you ; which I shouldn ’ t wonder at , a bit. ” Fagin offer no reply to this compliment : but , pull Sikes by the sleeve , point his finger towards Nancy , who have take advantage of the forego conversation to put on her bonnet , and be now leave the room .
“ Hallo ! ” cry Sikes .
“ Nance .
Where ’ s the gal go to at this time of night ? ” “ Not far. ” “ What answer ’ s that ? ” retort Sikes .
“ Do you hear me ? ” “ I don ’ t know where , ” reply the girl .
“ Then I do , ” say Sikes , more in the spirit of obstinacy than because he have any real objection to the girl go where she list .
“ Nowhere .
Sit down. ” “ I ’ m not well .
I tell you that before , ” rejoin the girl .
“ I want a breath of air. ” “ Put your head out of the winder , ” reply Sikes .
“ There ’ s not enough there , ” say the girl .
“ I want it in the street. ” “ Then you win ’ t have it , ” reply Sikes .
With which assurance he rise , lock the door , take the key out , and pull her bonnet from her head , flung it up to the top of an old press .
“ There , ” say the robber .
“ Now stop quietly where you be , will you ? ” “ It ’ s not such a matter a a bonnet would keep me , ” say the girl turn very pale .
“ What do you mean , Bill ?
Do you know what you ’ re do ? ” “ Know what I ’ m—Oh ! ” cry Sikes , turn to Fagin , “ she ’ s out of her sens , you know , or she daren ’ t talk to me in that way. ” “ You ’ ll drive me on the something desperate , ” mutter the girl place both hand upon her breast , a though to keep down by force some violent outbreak .
“ Let me go , will you , —this minute—this instant. ” “ No ! ” say Sikes .
“ Tell him to let me go , Fagin .
He have well .
It ’ ll be good for him .
Do you hear me ? ” cry Nancy stamp her foot upon the ground .
“ Hear you ! ” repeat Sikes turn round in his chair to confront her .
“ Aye !
And if I hear you for half a minute longer , the dog shall have such a grip on your throat a ’ ll tear some of that scream voice out .
Wot have come over you , you jade !
Wot be it ? ” “ Let me go , ” say the girl with great earnestness ; then sit herself down on the floor , before the door , she say , “ Bill , let me go ; you don ’ t know what you be do .
You don ’ t , indeed .
For only one hour—do—do ! ” “ Cut my limb off one by one ! ” cry Sikes , seize her roughly by the arm , “ If I don ’ t think the gal ’ s stark rave mad .
Get up. ” “ Not till you let me go—not till you let me go—Never—never ! ” scream the girl .
Sikes look on , for a minute , watch his opportunity , and suddenly pinion her hand drag her , struggle and wrestle with him by the way , into a small room adjoining , where he sit himself on a bench , and thrust her into a chair , hold her down by force .
She struggle and implore by turn until twelve o ’ clock have strike , and then , weary and exhaust , cease to contest the point any further .
With a caution , back by many oath , to make no more effort to go out that night , Sikes leave her to recover at leisure and rejoin Fagin .
“ Whew ! ” say the housebreaker wipe the perspiration from his face .
“ Wot a precious strange gal that be ! ” “ You may say that , Bill , ” reply Fagin thoughtfully .
“ You may say that. ” “ Wot do she take it into her head to go out to-night for , do you think ? ” ask Sikes .
“ Come ; you should know her good than me .
Wot do it mean ? ” “ Obstinacy ; woman ’ s obstinacy , I suppose , my dear. ” “ Well , I suppose it be , ” growl Sikes .
“ I think I have tame her , but she ’ s as bad a ever. ” “ Worse , ” say Fagin thoughtfully .
“ I never know her like this , for such a little cause. ” “ Nor I , ” say Sikes .
“ I think she ’ s get a touch of that fever in her blood yet , and it win ’ t come out—eh ? ” “ Like enough. ” “ I ’ ll let her a little blood , without trouble the doctor , if she ’ s take that way again , ” say Sikes .
Fagin nod an expressive approval of this mode of treatment .
“ She be hang about me all day , and night too , when I be stretch on my back ; and you , like a blackhearted wolf a you be , keep yourself aloof , ” say Sikes .
“ We be poor too , all the time , and I think , one way or other , it ’ s worried and fret her ; and that be shut up here so long have make her restless—eh ? ” “ That ’ s it , my dear , ” reply the Jew in a whisper .
“ Hush ! ” As he utter these word , the girl herself appear and resume her former seat .
Her eye be swell and red ; she rock herself to and fro ; toss her head ; and , after a little time , burst out laughing .
“ Why , now she ’ s on the other tack ! ” exclaim Sikes , turn a look of excessive surprise on his companion .
Fagin nod to him to take no further notice just then ; and , in a few minute , the girl subside into her accustomed demeanour .
Whispering Sikes that there be no fear of her relapsing , Fagin take up his hat and bid him good-night .
He pause when he reach the room-door , and look round , ask if somebody would light him down the dark stair .
“ Light him down , ” say Sikes , who be fill his pipe .
“ It ’ s a pity he should break his neck himself , and disappoint the sight-seers .
Show him a light. ” Nancy follow the old man downstairs , with a candle .
When they reach the passage , he lay his finger on his lip , and draw close to the girl , say , in a whisper .
“ What be it , Nancy , dear ? ” “ What do you mean ? ” reply the girl , in the same tone .
“ The reason of all this , ” reply Fagin .
“ If _he_ ” —he point with his skinny fore-finger up the stairs— “ be so hard with you ( he ’ s a brute , Nance , a brute-beast ) , why don ’ t you— ” “ Well ? ” say the girl , a Fagin pause , with his mouth almost touch her ear , and his eye look into hers .
“ No matter just now .
We ’ ll talk of this again .
You have a friend in me , Nance ; a staunch friend .
I have the mean at hand , quiet and close .
If you want revenge on those that treat you like a dog—like a dog !
bad than his dog , for he humour him sometimes—come to me .
I say , come to me .
He be the mere hound of a day , but you know me of old , Nance. ” “ I know you well , ” reply the girl , without manifest the least emotion .
“ Good-night. ” She shrink back , a Fagin offer to lay his hand on hers , but say good-night again , in a steady voice , and , answer his part look with a nod of intelligence , close the door between them .
Fagin walk towards his home , intent upon the thought that be work within his brain .
He have conceive the idea—not from what have just pass though that have tend to confirm him , but slowly and by degrees—that Nancy , weary of the housebreaker ’ s brutality , have conceive an attachment for some new friend .
Her altered manner , her repeat absence from home alone , her comparative indifference to the interest of the gang for which she have once be so zealous , and , add to these , her desperate impatience to leave home that night at a particular hour , all favour the supposition , and render it , to him at least , almost matter of certainty .
The object of this new liking be not among his myrmidon .
He would be a valuable acquisition with such an assistant a Nancy , and must ( thus Fagin argue ) be secure without delay .
There be another , and a darker object , to be gain .
Sikes know too much , and his ruffian taunt have not gall Fagin the less , because the wound be hide .
The girl must know , well , that if she shake him off , she could never be safe from his fury , and that it would be surely wreaked—to the maiming of limb , or perhaps the loss of life—on the object of her more recent fancy .
“ With a little persuasion , ” think Fagin , “ what more likely than that she would consent to poison him ?
Women have do such thing , and bad , to secure the same object before now .
There would be the dangerous villain : the man I hate : go ; another secure in his place ; and my influence over the girl , with a knowledge of this crime to back it , unlimited. ” These thing pass through the mind of Fagin , during the short time he sit alone , in the housebreaker ’ s room ; and with them uppermost in his thought , he have take the opportunity afterwards afford him , of sound the girl in the broken hint he throw out at part .
There be no expression of surprise , no assumption of an inability to understand his meaning .
The girl clearly comprehend it .
Her glance at part show _that_ .
But perhaps she would recoil from a plot to take the life of Sikes , and that be one of the chief end to be attain .
“ How , ” think Fagin , a he creep homeward , “ can I increase my influence with her ?
What new power can I acquire ? ” Such brain be fertile in expedient .
If , without extract a confession from herself , he lay a watch , discover the object of her altered regard , and threaten to reveal the whole history to Sikes ( of whom she stand in no common fear ) unless she enter into his design , could he not secure her compliance ?
“ I can , ” say Fagin , almost aloud .
“ She durst not refuse me then .
Not for her life , not for her life !
I have it all .
The mean be ready , and shall be set to work .
I shall have you yet ! ” He cast back a dark look , and a threatening motion of the hand , towards the spot where he have leave the bolder villain ; and go on his way : busy his bony hand in the fold of his tattered garment , which he wrench tightly in his grasp , a though there be a hat enemy crush with every motion of his finger .
CHAPTER XLV .
NOAH CLAYPOLE IS EMPLOYED BY FAGIN ON A SECRET MISSION The old man be up , betimes , next morning , and wait impatiently for the appearance of his new associate , who after a delay that seem interminable , at length present himself , and commence a voracious assault on the breakfast .
“ Bolter , ” say Fagin , draw up a chair and seating himself opposite Morris Bolter .
“ Well , here I be , ” return Noah .
“ What ’ s the matter ?
Don ’ t yer ask me to do anything till I have do eating .
That ’ s a great fault in this place .
Yer never get time enough over yer meals. ” “ You can talk a you eat , can ’ t you ? ” say Fagin , curse his dear young friend ’ s greediness from the very bottom of his heart .
“ Oh yes , I can talk .
I get on good when I talk , ” say Noah , cut a monstrous slice of bread .
“ Where ’ s Charlotte ? ” “ Out , ” say Fagin .
“ I send her out this morning with the other young woman , because I want u to be alone. ” “ Oh ! ” say Noah .
“ I wish yer ’ d order her to make some butter toast first .
Well .
Talk away .
Yer win ’ t interrupt me. ” There seem , indeed , no great fear of anything interrupt him , a he have evidently sit down with a determination to do a great deal of business .
“ You do well yesterday , my dear , ” say Fagin .
“ Beautiful !
Six shilling and ninepence halfpenny on the very first day !
The kinchin lay will be a fortune to you. ” “ Don ’ t you forget to add three pint-pots and a milk-can , ” say Mr. Bolter .
“ No , no , my dear .
The pint-pots be great stroke of genius : but the milk-can be a perfect masterpiece. ” “ Pretty well , I think , for a beginner , ” remark Mr. Bolter complacently .
“ The pot I take off airy railing , and the milk-can be stand by itself outside a public-house .
I think it might get rusty with the rain , or catch cold , yer know .
Eh ?
Ha !
ha !
ha ! ” Fagin affect to laugh very heartily ; and Mr. Bolter have have his laugh out , take a series of large bite , which finish his first hunk of bread and butter , and assist himself to a second .
“ I want you , Bolter , ” say Fagin , lean over the table , “ to do a piece of work for me , my dear , that need great care and caution. ” “ I say , ” rejoin Bolter , “ don ’ t yer go shove me into danger , or send me any more o ’ yer police-offices .
That don ’ t suit me , that don ’ t ; and so I tell yer. ” “ That ’ s not the small danger in it—not the very small , ” say the Jew ; “ it ’ s only to dodge a woman. ” “ An old woman ? ” demand Mr. Bolter .
“ A young one , ” replied Fagin .
“ I can do that pretty well , I know , ” say Bolter .
“ I be a regular cunning sneak when I be at school .
What be I to dodge her for ?
Not to— ” “ Not to do anything , but to tell me where she go , who she see , and , if possible , what she say ; to remember the street , if it be a street , or the house , if it be a house ; and to bring me back all the information you can. ” “ What ’ ll yer give me ? ” ask Noah , set down his cup , and look his employer , eagerly , in the face .
“ If you do it well , a pound , my dear .
One pound , ” say Fagin , wish to interest him in the scent as much a possible .
“ And that ’ s what I never give yet , for any job of work where there wasn ’ t valuable consideration to be gained. ” “ Who be she ? ” inquired Noah .
“ One of us. ” “ Oh Lor ! ” cry Noah , curl up his nose .
“ Yer doubtful of her , be yer ? ” “ She have find out some new friend , my dear , and I must know who they be , ” reply Fagin .
“ I see , ” say Noah .
“ Just to have the pleasure of know them , if they ’ re respectable people , eh ?
Ha !
ha !
ha !
I ’ m your man. ” “ I know you would be , ” cry Fagin , elate by the success of his proposal .
“ Of course , of course , ” reply Noah .
“ Where be she ?
Where be I to wait for her ?
Where be I to go ? ” “ All that , my dear , you shall hear from me .
I ’ ll point her out at the proper time , ” say Fagin .
“ You keep ready , and leave the rest to me. ” That night , and the next , and the next again , the spy sit boot and equip in his carter ’ s dress : ready to turn out at a word from Fagin .
Six night passed—six long weary nights—and on each , Fagin come home with a disappointed face , and briefly intimate that it be not yet time .
On the seventh , he return earlier , and with an exultation he could not conceal .
It be Sunday .
“ She go abroad to-night , ” say Fagin , “ and on the right errand , I ’ m sure ; for she have be alone all day , and the man she be afraid of will not be back much before daybreak .
Come with me .
Quick ! ” Noah start up without say a word ; for the Jew be in a state of such intense excitement that it infect him .
They leave the house stealthily , and hurry through a labyrinth of street , arrive at length before a public-house , which Noah recognise a the same in which he have sleep , on the night of his arrival in London .
It be past eleven o ’ clock , and the door be close .
It open softly on it hinge a Fagin give a low whistle .
They enter , without noise ; and the door be close behind them .
Scarcely venture to whisper , but substitute dumb show for word , Fagin , and the young Jew who have admit them , point out the pane of glass to Noah , and sign to him to climb up and observe the person in the adjoining room .
“ Is that the woman ? ” he ask , scarcely above his breath .
Fagin nod yes .
“ I can ’ t see her face well , ” whisper Noah .
“ She be look down , and the candle be behind her .
“ Stay there , ” whisper Fagin .
He sign to Barney , who withdraw .
In an instant , the lad enter the room adjoining , and , under pretence of snuff the candle , move it in the required position , and , speak to the girl , cause her to raise her face .
“ I see her now , ” cry the spy .
“ Plainly ? ” “ I should know her among a thousand. ” He hastily descend , a the room-door open , and the girl come out .
Fagin draw him behind a small partition which be curtain off , and they hold their breath a she pass within a few foot of their place of concealment , and emerge by the door at which they have enter .
“ Hist ! ” cry the lad who hold the door .
“ Dow. ” Noah exchange a look with Fagin , and dart out .
“ To the left , ” whisper the lad ; “ take the left have , and keep od the other side. ” He do so ; and , by the light of the lamp , saw the girl ’ s retreat figure , already at some distance before him .
He advance as near a he consider prudent , and keep on the opposite side of the street , the good to observe her motion .
She look nervously round , twice or thrice , and once stop to let two men who be follow close behind her , pas on .
She seem to gather courage a she advance , and to walk with a steady and firm step .
The spy preserve the same relative distance between them , and follow : with his eye upon her .
CHAPTER XLVI .
THE APPOINTMENT KEPT The church clock chime three quarter past eleven , a two figure emerge on London Bridge .
One , which advance with a swift and rapid step , be that of a woman who look eagerly about her a though in quest of some expected object ; the other figure be that of a man , who slink along in the deep shadow he could find , and , at some distance , accommodate his pace to hers : stopping when she stop : and a she move again , creep stealthily on : but never allow himself , in the ardour of his pursuit , to gain upon her footstep .
Thus , they cross the bridge , from the Middlesex to the Surrey shore , when the woman , apparently disappointed in her anxious scrutiny of the foot-passengers , turn back .
The movement be sudden ; but he who watch her , be not throw off his guard by it ; for , shrink into one of the recess which surmount the pier of the bridge , and lean over the parapet the good to conceal his figure , he suffer her to pass on the opposite pavement .
When she be about the same distance in advance a she have be before , he slip quietly down , and follow her again .
At nearly the centre of the bridge , she stop .
The man stop too .
It be a very dark night .
The day have be unfavourable , and at that hour and place there be few people stir .
Such a there be , hurry quickly past : very possibly without see , but certainly without notice , either the woman , or the man who keep her in view .
Their appearance be not calculate to attract the importunate regard of such of London ’ s destitute population , a chance to take their way over the bridge that night in search of some cold arch or doorless hovel wherein to lay their head ; they stand there in silence : neither speak nor spoken to , by any one who pass .
A mist hung over the river , deepen the red glare of the fire that burn upon the small craft moor off the different wharf , and render darker and more indistinct the murky building on the bank .
The old smoke-stained storehouse on either side , rise heavy and dull from the dense mass of roof and gable , and frown sternly upon water too black to reflect even their lumbering shape .
The tower of old Saint Saviour ’ s Church , and the spire of Saint Magnus , so long the giant-warders of the ancient bridge , be visible in the gloom ; but the forest of ship below bridge , and the thickly scatter spire of church above , be nearly all hidden from sight .
The girl have take a few restless turn to and fro—closely watch meanwhile by her hidden observer—when the heavy bell of St. Paul ’ s toll for the death of another day .
Midnight have come upon the crowded city .
The palace , the night-cellar , the jail , the madhouse : the chamber of birth and death , of health and sickness , the rigid face of the corpse and the calm sleep of the child : midnight be upon them all .
The hour have not strike two minute , when a young lady , accompany by a grey-haired gentleman , alight from a hackney-carriage within a short distance of the bridge , and , have dismiss the vehicle , walk straight towards it .
They have scarcely set foot upon it pavement , when the girl start , and immediately make towards them .
They walk onward , look about them with the air of person who entertain some very slight expectation which have little chance of be realise , when they be suddenly join by this new associate .
They halt with an exclamation of surprise , but suppress it immediately ; for a man in the garment of a countryman come close up—brushed against them , indeed—at that precise moment .
“ Not here , ” say Nancy hurriedly , “ I be afraid to speak to you here .
Come away—out of the public road—down the step yonder ! ” As she utter these word , and indicate , with her hand , the direction in which she wish them to proceed , the countryman look round , and roughly ask what they take up the whole pavement for , pass on .
The step to which the girl have point , be those which , on the Surrey bank , and on the same side of the bridge a Saint Saviour ’ s Church , form a landing-stairs from the river .
To this spot , the man bear the appearance of a countryman , hasten unobserved ; and after a moment ’ s survey of the place , he begin to descend .
These stair be a part of the bridge ; they consist of three flight .
Just below the end of the second , go down , the stone wall on the left terminate in an ornamental pilaster facing towards the Thames .
At this point the low step widen : so that a person turn that angle of the wall , be necessarily unseen by any others on the stair who chance to be above him , if only a step .
The countryman look hastily round , when he reach this point ; and a there seem no good place of concealment , and , the tide be out , there be plenty of room , he slip aside , with his back to the pilaster , and there wait : pretty certain that they would come no low , and that even if he could not hear what be say , he could follow them again , with safety .
So tardily steal the time in this lonely place , and so eager be the spy to penetrate the motif of an interview so different from what he have be lead to expect , that he more than once give the matter up for lose , and persuade himself , either that they have stop far above , or have resort to some entirely different spot to hold their mysterious conversation .
He be on the point of emerge from his hiding-place , and regain the road above , when he hear the sound of footstep , and directly afterwards of voice almost close at his ear .
He draw himself straight upright against the wall , and , scarcely breathe , listen attentively .
“ This be far enough , ” say a voice , which be evidently that of the gentleman .
“ I will not suffer the young lady to go any farther .
Many people would have distrust you too much to have come even so far , but you see I be willing to humour you. ” “ To humour me ! ” cry the voice of the girl whom he have follow .
“ You ’ re considerate , indeed , sir .
To humour me !
Well , well , it ’ s no matter. ” “ Why , for what , ” say the gentleman in a kinder tone , “ for what purpose can you have bring u to this strange place ?
Why not have let me speak to you , above there , where it be light , and there be something stir , instead of bring u to this dark and dismal hole ? ” “ I tell you before , ” reply Nancy , “ that I be afraid to speak to you there .
I don ’ t know why it be , ” say the girl , shudder , “ but I have such a fear and dread upon me to-night that I can hardly stand. ” “ A fear of what ? ” ask the gentleman , who seem to pity her .
“ I scarcely know of what , ” reply the girl .
“ I wish I do .
Horrible thought of death , and shroud with blood upon them , and a fear that have make me burn a if I be on fire , have be upon me all day .
I be read a book to-night , to wile the time away , and the same thing come into the print. ” “ Imagination , ” say the gentleman , soothe her .
“ No imagination , ” reply the girl in a hoarse voice .
“ I ’ ll swear I saw ‘ coffin ’ write in every page of the book in large black letter , —aye , and they carry one close to me , in the street to-night. ” “ There be nothing unusual in that , ” say the gentleman .
“ They have pass me often. ” “ _Real ones_ , ” rejoin the girl .
“ This be not. ” There be something so uncommon in her manner , that the flesh of the concealed listener creep a he hear the girl utter these word , and the blood chill within him .
He have never experience a great relief than in hear the sweet voice of the young lady a she beg her to be calm , and not allow herself to become the prey of such fearful fancy .
“ Speak to her kindly , ” say the young lady to her companion .
“ Poor creature !
She seem to need it. ” “ Your haughty religious people would have hold their head up to see me a I be to-night , and preach of flame and vengeance , ” cry the girl .
“ Oh , dear lady , why ar ’ n ’ t those who claim to be God ’ s own folk a gentle and a kind to u poor wretch a you , who , have youth , and beauty , and all that they have lose , might be a little proud instead of so much humbler ? ” “ Ah ! ” say the gentleman .
“ A Turk turn his face , after wash it well , to the East , when he say his prayer ; these good people , after give their face such a rub against the World a to take the smile off , turn with no less regularity , to the dark side of Heaven .
Between the Mussulman and the Pharisee , commend me to the first ! ” These word appear to be address to the young lady , and be perhaps utter with the view of afford Nancy time to recover herself .
The gentleman , shortly afterwards , address himself to her .
“ You be not here last Sunday night , ” he say .
“ I couldn ’ t come , ” reply Nancy ; “ I be keep by force. ” “ By whom ? ” “ Him that I tell the young lady of before. ” “ You be not suspect of hold any communication with anybody on the subject which have bring u here to-night , I hope ? ” ask the old gentleman .
“ No , ” reply the girl , shake her head .
“ It ’ s not very easy for me to leave him unless he know why ; I couldn ’ t give him a drink of laudanum before I come away. ” “ Did he awake before you return ? ” inquire the gentleman .
“ No ; and neither he nor any of them suspect me. ” “ Good , ” say the gentleman .
“ Now listen to me. ” “ I be ready , ” reply the girl , a he pause for a moment .
“ This young lady , ” the gentleman begin , “ have communicate to me , and to some other friend who can be safely trust , what you tell her nearly a fortnight since .
I confess to you that I have doubt , at first , whether you be to be implicitly rely upon , but now I firmly believe you are. ” “ I be , ” say the girl earnestly .
“ I repeat that I firmly believe it .
To prove to you that I be dispose to trust you , I tell you without reserve , that we propose to extort the secret , whatever it may be , from the fear of this man Monks .
But if—if— ” say the gentleman , “ he can not be secure , or , if secure , can not be act upon a we wish , you must deliver up the Jew. ” “ Fagin , ” cry the girl , recoil .
“ That man must be deliver up by you , ” say the gentleman .
“ I will not do it !
I will never do it ! ” reply the girl .
“ Devil that he be , and bad than devil a he have be to me , I will never do that. ” “ You will not ? ” say the gentleman , who seem fully prepare for this answer .
“ Never ! ” return the girl .
“ Tell me why ? ” “ For one reason , ” rejoin the girl firmly , “ for one reason , that the lady know and will stand by me in , I know she will , for I have her promise : and for this other reason , besides , that , bad life a he have lead , I have lead a bad life too ; there be many of u who have keep the same course together , and I ’ ll not turn upon them , who might—any of them—have turn upon me , but didn ’ t , bad a they are. ” “ Then , ” say the gentleman , quickly , a if this have be the point he have be aim to attain ; “ put Monks into my hand , and leave him to me to deal with. ” “ What if he turn against the others ? ” “ I promise you that in that case , if the truth be force from him , there the matter will rest ; there must be circumstance in Oliver ’ s little history which it would be painful to drag before the public eye , and if the truth be once elicit , they shall go scot free. ” “ And if it be not ? ” suggest the girl .
“ Then , ” pursue the gentleman , “ this Fagin shall not be bring to justice without your consent .
In such a case I could show you reason , I think , which would induce you to yield it. ” “ Have I the lady ’ s promise for that ? ” ask the girl .
“ You have , ” reply Rose .
“ My true and faithful pledge. ” “ Monks would never learn how you know what you do ? ” say the girl , after a short pause .
“ Never , ” reply the gentleman .
“ The intelligence should be bring to bear upon him , that he could never even guess. ” “ I have be a liar , and among liar from a little child , ” say the girl after another interval of silence , “ but I will take your words. ” After receive an assurance from both , that she might safely do so , she proceed in a voice so low that it be often difficult for the listener to discover even the purport of what she say , to describe , by name and situation , the public-house whence she have be follow that night .
From the manner in which she occasionally pause , it appear a if the gentleman be make some hasty note of the information she communicate .
When she have thoroughly explain the locality of the place , the best position from which to watch it without excite observation , and the night and hour on which Monks be most in the habit of frequent it , she seem to consider for a few moment , for the purpose of recall his feature and appearance more forcibly to her recollection .
“ He be tall , ” say the girl , “ and a strongly make man , but not stout ; he have a lurking walk ; and a he walk , constantly look over his shoulder , first on one side , and then on the other .
Don ’ t forget that , for his eye be sink in his head so much deep than any other man ’ s , that you might almost tell him by that alone .
His face be dark , like his hair and eye ; and , although he can ’ t be more than six or eight and twenty , wither and haggard .
His lip be often discolour and disfigure with the mark of teeth ; for he have desperate fit , and sometimes even bite his hand and cover them with wounds—why do you start ? ” say the girl , stop suddenly .
The gentleman reply , in a hurried manner , that he be not conscious of have do so , and beg her to proceed .
“ Part of this , ” say the girl , “ I have draw out from other people at the house I tell you of , for I have only see him twice , and both time he be cover up in a large cloak .
I think that ’ s all I can give you to know him by .
Stay though , ” she add .
“ Upon his throat : so high that you can see a part of it below his neckerchief when he turn his face : there is— ” “ A broad red mark , like a burn or scald ? ” cry the gentleman .
“ How ’ s this ? ” say the girl .
“ You know him ! ” The young lady utter a cry of surprise , and for a few moment they be so still that the listener could distinctly hear them breathe .
“ I think I do , ” say the gentleman , break silence .
“ I should by your description .
We shall see .
Many people be singularly like each other .
It may not be the same. ” As he express himself to this effect , with assumed carelessness , he take a step or two nearer the concealed spy , a the latter could tell from the distinctness with which he hear him mutter , “ It must be he ! ” “ Now , ” he say , return : so it seem by the sound : to the spot where he have stand before , “ you have give u most valuable assistance , young woman , and I wish you to be the good for it .
What can I do to serve you ? ” “ Nothing , ” reply Nancy .
“ You will not persist in say that , ” rejoin the gentleman , with a voice and emphasis of kindness that might have touch a much hard and more obdurate heart .
“ Think now .
Tell me. ” “ Nothing , sir , ” rejoin the girl , weep .
“ You can do nothing to help me .
I be past all hope , indeed. ” “ You put yourself beyond it pale , ” say the gentleman .
“ The past have be a dreary waste with you , of youthful energy mis-spent , and such priceless treasure lavish , a the Creator bestows but once and never grant again , but , for the future , you may hope .
I do not say that it be in our power to offer you peace of heart and mind , for that must come a you seek it ; but a quiet asylum , either in England , or , if you fear to remain here , in some foreign country , it be not only within the compass of our ability but our most anxious wish to secure you .
Before the dawn of morning , before this river wake to the first glimpse of day-light , you shall be place a entirely beyond the reach of your former associate , and leave a utter an absence of all trace behind you , a if you be to disappear from the earth this moment .
Come !
I would not have you go back to exchange one word with any old companion , or take one look at any old haunt , or breathe the very air which be pestilence and death to you .
Quit them all , while there be time and opportunity ! ” “ She will be persuade now , ” cry the young lady .
“ She hesitate , I be sure. ” “ I fear not , my dear , ” say the gentleman .
“ No sir , I do not , ” reply the girl , after a short struggle .
“ I be chain to my old life .
I loathe and hate it now , but I can not leave it .
I must have go too far to turn back , —and yet I don ’ t know , for if you have speak to me so , some time ago , I should have laugh it off .
But , ” she say , look hastily round , “ this fear come over me again .
I must go home. ” “ Home ! ” repeat the young lady , with great stress upon the word .
“ Home , lady , ” rejoin the girl .
“ To such a home a I have raise for myself with the work of my whole life .
Let u part .
I shall be watch or see .
Go !
Go !
If I have do you any service all I ask be , that you leave me , and let me go my way alone. ” “ It be useless , ” say the gentleman , with a sigh .
“ We compromise her safety , perhaps , by stay here .
We may have detain her long than she expect already. ” “ Yes , yes , ” urge the girl .
“ You have. ” “ What , ” cry the young lady , “ can be the end of this poor creature ’ s life ! ” “ What ! ” repeat the girl .
“ Look before you , lady .
Look at that dark water .
How many time do you read of such a I who spring into the tide , and leave no living thing , to care for , or bewail them .
It may be year hence , or it may be only month , but I shall come to that at last. ” “ Do not speak thus , pray , ” return the young lady , sob .
“ It will never reach your ear , dear lady , and God forbid such horror should ! ” reply the girl .
“ Good-night , good-night ! ” The gentleman turn away .
“ This purse , ” cry the young lady .
“ Take it for my sake , that you may have some resource in an hour of need and trouble. ” “ No ! ” reply the girl .
“ I have not do this for money .
Let me have that to think of .
And yet—give me something that you have wear : I should like to have something—no , no , not a ring—your glove or handkerchief—anything that I can keep , a have belong to you , sweet lady .
There .
Bless you !
God bless you .
Good-night , good-night ! ” The violent agitation of the girl , and the apprehension of some discovery which would subject her to ill-usage and violence , seem to determine the gentleman to leave her , a she request .
The sound of retreat footstep be audible and the voice cease .
The two figure of the young lady and her companion soon afterwards appear upon the bridge .
They stop at the summit of the stair .
“ Hark ! ” cry the young lady , listen .
“ Did she call !
I think I hear her voice. ” “ No , my love , ” reply Mr. Brownlow , look sadly back .
“ She have not move , and will not till we be gone. ” Rose Maylie linger , but the old gentleman draw her arm through his , and lead her , with gentle force , away .
As they disappear , the girl sink down nearly at her full length upon one of the stone stair , and vent the anguish of her heart in bitter tear .
After a time she arise , and with feeble and totter step ascend the street .
The astonished listener remain motionless on his post for some minute afterwards , and have ascertain , with many cautious glance round him , that he be again alone , creep slowly from his hiding-place , and return , stealthily and in the shade of the wall , in the same manner a he have descend .
Peeping out , more than once , when he reach the top , to make sure that he be unobserved , Noah Claypole dart away at his utmost speed , and make for the Jew ’ s house a fast a his leg would carry him .
CHAPTER XLVII .
FATAL CONSEQUENCES It be nearly two hour before day-break ; that time which in the autumn of the year , may be truly call the dead of night ; when the street be silent and desert ; when even sound appear to slumber , and profligacy and riot have stagger home to dream ; it be at this still and silent hour , that Fagin sit watch in his old lair , with face so distorted and pale , and eye so red and blood-shot , that he look less like a man , than like some hideous phantom , moist from the grave , and worry by an evil spirit .
He sit crouch over a cold hearth , wrap in an old torn coverlet , with his face turn towards a waste candle that stand upon a table by his side .
His right hand be raise to his lip , and a , absorb in thought , he hit his long black nail , he disclose among his toothless gum a few such fang a should have be a dog ’ s or rat ’ s .
Stretched upon a mattress on the floor , lay Noah Claypole , fast asleep .
Towards him the old man sometimes direct his eye for an instant , and then bring them back again to the candle ; which with a long-burnt wick droop almost double , and hot grease fall down in clot upon the table , plainly show that his thought be busy elsewhere .
Indeed they be .
Mortification at the overthrow of his notable scheme ; hatred of the girl who have dare to palter with stranger ; and utter distrust of the sincerity of her refusal to yield him up ; bitter disappointment at the loss of his revenge on Sikes ; the fear of detection , and ruin , and death ; and a fierce and deadly rage kindle by all ; these be the passionate consideration which , follow close upon each other with rapid and ceaseless whirl , shot through the brain of Fagin , a every evil thought and black purpose lay work at his heart .
He sit without change his attitude in the least , or appear to take the small heed of time , until his quick ear seem to be attract by a footstep in the street .
“ At last , ” he mutter , wipe his dry and fevered mouth .
“ At last ! ” The bell ring gently a he speak .
He creep upstairs to the door , and presently return accompany by a man muffle to the chin , who carry a bundle under one arm .
Sitting down and throw back his outer coat , the man display the burly frame of Sikes .
“ There ! ” he say , lay the bundle on the table .
“ Take care of that , and do the most you can with it .
It ’ s be trouble enough to get ; I think I should have be here , three hour ago. ” Fagin lay his hand upon the bundle , and lock it in the cupboard , sit down again without speaking .
But he do not take his eye off the robber , for an instant , during this action ; and now that they sit over against each other , face to face , he look fixedly at him , with his lip quiver so violently , and his face so alter by the emotion which have master him , that the housebreaker involuntarily draw back his chair , and survey him with a look of real affright .
“ Wot now ? ” cry Sikes .
“ Wot do you look at a man so for ? ” Fagin raise his right hand , and shake his tremble forefinger in the air ; but his passion be so great , that the power of speech be for the moment go .
“ Damme ! ” say Sikes , feel in his breast with a look of alarm .
“ He ’ s go mad .
I must look to myself here. ” “ No , no , ” rejoin Fagin , find his voice .
“ It ’ s not—you ’ re not the person , Bill .
I ’ ve no—no fault to find with you. ” “ Oh , you haven ’ t , haven ’ t you ? ” say Sikes , look sternly at him , and ostentatiously pass a pistol into a more convenient pocket .
“ That ’ s lucky—for one of u .
Which one that be , don ’ t matter. ” “ I ’ ve get that to tell you , Bill , ” say Fagin , draw his chair nearer , “ will make you bad than me. ” “ Aye ? ” return the robber with an incredulous air .
“ Tell away !
Look sharp , or Nance will think I ’ m lost. ” “ Lost ! ” cry Fagin .
“ She have pretty well settle that , in her own mind , already. ” Sikes look with an aspect of great perplexity into the Jew ’ s face , and read no satisfactory explanation of the riddle there , clench his coat collar in his huge hand and shake him soundly .
“ Speak , will you ! ” he say ; “ or if you don ’ t , it shall be for want of breath .
Open your mouth and say wot you ’ ve get to say in plain word .
Out with it , you thunder old cur , out with it ! ” “ Suppose that lad that ’ s lay there— ” Fagin begin .
Sikes turn round to where Noah be sleep , a if he have not previously observe him .
“ Well ! ” he say , resume his former position .
“ Suppose that lad , ” pursue Fagin , “ be to peach—to blow upon u all—first seek out the right folk for the purpose , and then have a meeting with ’ em in the street to paint our likeness , describe every mark that they might know u by , and the crib where we might be most easily take .
Suppose he be to do all this , and besides to blow upon a plant we ’ ve all be in , more or less—of his own fancy ; not grab , trap , try , earwigged by the parson and bring to it on bread and water , —but of his own fancy ; to please his own taste ; steal out at night to find those most interested against u , and peach to them .
Do you hear me ? ” cry the Jew , his eye flash with rage .
“ Suppose he do all this , what then ? ” “ What then ! ” reply Sikes ; with a tremendous oath .
“ If he be leave alive till I come , I ’ d grind his skull under the iron heel of my boot into a many grain a there be hair upon his head. ” “ What if I do it ! ” cry Fagin almost in a yell .
“ I , that know so much , and could hang so many besides myself ! ” “ I don ’ t know , ” reply Sikes , clench his teeth and turn white at the mere suggestion .
“ I ’ d do something in the jail that ’ ud get me put in iron ; and if I be try along with you , I ’ d fall upon you with them in the open court , and beat your brain out afore the people .
I should have such strength , ” mutter the robber , poise his brawny arm , “ that I could smash your head a if a loaded waggon have go over it. ” “ You would ? ” “ Would I ! ” say the housebreaker .
“ Try me. ” “ If it be Charley , or the Dodger , or Bet , or— ” “ I don ’ t care who , ” reply Sikes impatiently .
“ Whoever it be , I ’ d serve them the same. ” Fagin look hard at the robber ; and , motion him to be silent , stoop over the bed upon the floor , and shake the sleeper to rouse him .
Sikes leant forward in his chair : look on with his hand upon his knee , a if wonder much what all this questioning and preparation be to end in .
“ Bolter , Bolter !
Poor lad ! ” say Fagin , look up with an expression of devilish anticipation , and speak slowly and with marked emphasis .
“ He ’ s tired—tired with watch for her so long , —watching for _her_ , Bill. ” “ Wot d ’ ye mean ? ” ask Sikes , draw back .
Fagin make no answer , but bend over the sleeper again , haul him into a sitting posture .
When his assume name have be repeat several time , Noah rub his eye , and , give a heavy yawn , look sleepily about him .
“ Tell me that again—once again , just for him to hear , ” say the Jew , point to Sikes a he speak .
“ Tell yer what ? ” ask the sleepy Noah , shake himself pettishly .
“ That about— _Nancy_ , ” say Fagin , clutch Sikes by the wrist , a if to prevent his leave the house before he have hear enough .
“ You follow her ? ” “ Yes. ” “ To London Bridge ? ” “ Yes. ” “ Where she meet two people. ” “ So she did. ” “ A gentleman and a lady that she have go to of her own accord before , who ask her to give up all her pal , and Monks first , which she did—and to describe him , which she did—and to tell her what house it be that we meet at , and go to , which she did—and where it could be best watch from , which she did—and what time the people go there , which she do .
She do all this .
She tell it all every word without a threat , without a murmur—she did—did she not ? ” cried Fagin , half mad with fury .
“ All right , ” reply Noah , scratch his head .
“ That ’ s just what it be ! ” “ What do they say , about last Sunday ? ” “ About last Sunday ! ” reply Noah , consider .
“ Why I tell yer that before. ” “ Again .
Tell it again ! ” cry Fagin , tighten his grasp on Sikes , and brandish his other hand aloft , a the foam fly from his lip .
“ They ask her , ” say Noah , who , a he grow more wakeful , seem to have a dawning perception who Sikes be , “ they ask her why she didn ’ t come , last Sunday , a she promise .
She say she couldn ’ t. ” “ Why—why ?
Tell him that. ” “ Because she be forcibly keep at home by Bill , the man she have tell them of before , ” reply Noah .
“ What more of him ? ” cry Fagin .
“ What more of the man she have tell them of before ?
Tell him that , tell him that. ” “ Why , that she couldn ’ t very easily get out of door unless he know where she be go to , ” say Noah ; “ and so the first time she go to see the lady , she—ha !
ha !
ha !
it make me laugh when she say it , that it did—she give him a drink of laudanum. ” “ Hell ’ s fire ! ” cry Sikes , break fiercely from the Jew .
“ Let me go ! ” Flinging the old man from him , he rush from the room , and dart , wildly and furiously , up the stair .
“ Bill , Bill ! ” cry Fagin , follow him hastily .
“ A word .
Only a word. ” The word would not have be exchange , but that the housebreaker be unable to open the door : on which he be expend fruitless oath and violence , when the Jew come pant up .
“ Let me out , ” say Sikes .
“ Don ’ t speak to me ; it ’ s not safe .
Let me out , I say ! ” “ Hear me speak a word , ” rejoin Fagin , lay his hand upon the lock .
“ You win ’ t be— ” “ Well , ” reply the other .
“ You win ’ t be—too—violent , Bill ? ” The day be break , and there be light enough for the men to see each other ’ s face .
They exchange one brief glance ; there be a fire in the eye of both , which could not be mistake .
“ I mean , ” say Fagin , show that he felt all disguise be now useless , “ not too violent for safety .
Be crafty , Bill , and not too bold. ” Sikes make no reply ; but , pull open the door , of which Fagin have turn the lock , dash into the silent street .
Without one pause , or moment ’ s consideration ; without once turn his head to the right or leave , or raise his eye to the sky , or lower them to the ground , but look straight before him with savage resolution : his teeth so tightly compress that the strained jaw seem start through his skin ; the robber hold on his headlong course , nor mutter a word , nor relax a muscle , until he reach his own door .
He open it , softly , with a key ; strode lightly up the stair ; and enter his own room , double-locked the door , and lift a heavy table against it , draw back the curtain of the bed .
The girl be lie , half-dressed , upon it .
He have rouse her from her sleep , for she raise herself with a hurried and startled look .
“ Get up ! ” say the man .
“ It be you , Bill ! ” say the girl , with an expression of pleasure at his return .
“ It be , ” be the reply .
“ Get up. ” There be a candle burning , but the man hastily draw it from the candlestick , and hurl it under the grate .
Seeing the faint light of early day without , the girl rise to undraw the curtain .
“ Let it be , ” say Sikes , thrust his hand before her .
“ There ’ s enough light for wot I ’ ve get to do. ” “ Bill , ” say the girl , in the low voice of alarm , “ why do you look like that at me ! ” The robber sit regard her , for a few second , with dilate nostril and heave breast ; and then , grasp her by the head and throat , drag her into the middle of the room , and look once towards the door , place his heavy hand upon her mouth .
“ Bill , Bill ! ” gasp the girl , wrestle with the strength of mortal fear , — “ I—I win ’ t scream or cry—not once—hear me—speak to me—tell me what I have do ! ” “ You know , you she devil ! ” return the robber , suppress his breath .
“ You be watch to-night ; every word you say be heard. ” “ Then spare my life for the love of Heaven , a I spar yours , ” rejoin the girl , cling to him .
“ Bill , dear Bill , you can not have the heart to kill me .
Oh !
think of all I have give up , only this one night , for you .
You _shall_ have time to think , and save yourself this crime ; I will not loose my hold , you can not throw me off .
Bill , Bill , for dear God ’ s sake , for your own , for mine , stop before you spill my blood !
I have be true to you , upon my guilty soul I have ! ” The man struggle violently , to release his arm ; but those of the girl be clasp round his , and tear her a he would , he could not tear them away .
“ Bill , ” cry the girl , strive to lay her head upon his breast , “ the gentleman and that dear lady , tell me to-night of a home in some foreign country where I could end my day in solitude and peace .
Let me see them again , and beg them , on my knee , to show the same mercy and goodness to you ; and let u both leave this dreadful place , and far apart lead well life , and forget how we have live , except in prayer , and never see each other more .
It be never too late to repent .
They tell me so—I feel it now—but we must have time—a little , little time ! ” The housebreaker free one arm , and grasp his pistol .
The certainty of immediate detection if he fire , flash across his mind even in the midst of his fury ; and he beat it twice with all the force he could summon , upon the upturned face that almost touch his own .
She stagger and fell : nearly blind with the blood that rain down from a deep gash in her forehead ; but raise herself , with difficulty , on her knee , draw from her bosom a white handkerchief—Rose Maylie ’ s own—and hold it up , in her folded hand , a high towards Heaven a her feeble strength would allow , breathe one prayer for mercy to her Maker .
It be a ghastly figure to look upon .
The murderer stagger backward to the wall , and shut out the sight with his hand , seize a heavy club and strike her down .
CHAPTER XLVIII .
THE FLIGHT OF SIKES Of all bad deed that , under cover of the darkness , have be commit within wide London ’ s bound since night hung over it , that be the bad .
Of all the horror that rise with an ill scent upon the morning air , that be the foul and most cruel .
The sun—the bright sun , that bring back , not light alone , but new life , and hope , and freshness to man—burst upon the crowded city in clear and radiant glory .
Through costly-coloured glass and paper-mended window , through cathedral dome and rotten crevice , it shed it equal ray .
It light up the room where the murder woman lay .
It do .
He try to shut it out , but it would stream in .
If the sight have be a ghastly one in the dull morning , what be it , now , in all that brilliant light !
He have not move ; he have be afraid to stir .
There have be a moan and motion of the hand ; and , with terror add to rage , he have strike and strike again .
Once he throw a rug over it ; but it be bad to fancy the eye , and imagine them move towards him , than to see them glare upward , a if watch the reflection of the pool of gore that quiver and dance in the sunlight on the ceiling .
He have pluck it off again .
And there be the body—mere flesh and blood , no more—but such flesh , and so much blood !
He strike a light , kindle a fire , and thrust the club into it .
There be hair upon the end , which blaze and shrink into a light cinder , and , catch by the air , whirl up the chimney .
Even that frighten him , sturdy a he be ; but he hold the weapon till it break , and then pile it on the coal to burn away , and smoulder into ash .
He wash himself , and rub his clothes ; there be spot that would not be remove , but he cut the piece out , and burn them .
How those stain be disperse about the room !
The very foot of the dog be bloody .
All this time he have , never once , turn his back upon the corpse ; no , not for a moment .
Such preparation complete , he move , backward , towards the door : drag the dog with him , lest he should soil his foot anew and carry out new evidence of the crime into the street .
He shut the door softly , lock it , take the key , and leave the house .
He cross over , and glance up at the window , to be sure that nothing be visible from the outside .
There be the curtain still draw , which she would have open to admit the light she never saw again .
It lay nearly under there .
_He_ know that .
God , how the sun pour down upon the very spot !
The glance be instantaneous .
It be a relief to have get free of the room .
He whistle on the dog , and walk rapidly away .
He go through Islington ; stride up the hill at Highgate on which stand the stone in honour of Whittington ; turn down to Highgate Hill , unsteady of purpose , and uncertain where to go ; strike off to the right again , almost as soon a he begin to descend it ; and take the foot-path across the field , skirt Caen Wood , and so come on Hampstead Heath .
Traversing the hollow by the Vale of Heath , he mount the opposite bank , and cross the road which join the village of Hampstead and Highgate , make along the remain portion of the heath to the field at North End , in one of which he lay himself down under a hedge , and slept .
Soon he be up again , and away , —not far into the country , but back towards London by the high-road—then back again—then over another part of the same ground a he already traversed—then wander up and down in field , and lie on ditch ’ brink to rest , and start up to make for some other spot , and do the same , and ramble on again .
Where could he go , that be near and not too public , to get some meat and drink ?
Hendon .
That be a good place , not far off , and out of most people ’ s way .
Thither he direct his step , —running sometimes , and sometimes , with a strange perversity , loiter at a snail ’ s pace , or stop altogether and idly break the hedge with a stick .
But when he get there , all the people he met—the very child at the doors—seemed to view him with suspicion .
Back he turn again , without the courage to purchase bit or drop , though he have taste no food for many hour ; and once more he linger on the Heath , uncertain where to go .
He wander over mile and mile of ground , and still come back to the old place .
Morning and noon have pass , and the day be on the wane , and still he ramble to and fro , and up and down , and round and round , and still linger about the same spot .
At last he get away , and shape his course for Hatfield .
It be nine o ’ clock at night , when the man , quite tire out , and the dog , limp and lame from the unaccustomed exercise , turn down the hill by the church of the quiet village , and plod along the little street , creep into a small public-house , whose scanty light have guide them to the spot .
There be a fire in the tap-room , and some country-labourers be drink before it .
They make room for the stranger , but he sit down in the furthest corner , and ate and drink alone , or rather with his dog : to whom he cast a morsel of food from time to time .
The conversation of the men assemble here , turn upon the neighbouring land , and farmer ; and when those topic be exhaust , upon the age of some old man who have be bury on the previous Sunday ; the young men present consider him very old , and the old men present declare him to have be quite young—not old , one white-haired grandfather say , than he was—with ten or fifteen year of life in him at least—if he have take care ; if he have take care .
There be nothing to attract attention , or excite alarm in this .
The robber , after pay his reckoning , sit silent and unnoticed in his corner , and have almost drop asleep , when he be half waken by the noisy entrance of a new comer .
This be an antic fellow , half pedlar and half mountebank , who travel about the country on foot to vend hone , strop , razor , washballs , harness-paste , medicine for dog and horse , cheap perfumery , cosmetic , and such-like ware , which he carry in a case slung to his back .
His entrance be the signal for various homely joke with the countryman , which slacken not until he have make his supper , and open his box of treasure , when he ingeniously contrive to unite business with amusement .
“ And what be that stoof ?
Good to eat , Harry ? ” ask a grinning countryman , point to some composition-cakes in one corner .
“ This , ” say the fellow , produce one , “ this be the infallible and invaluable composition for remove all sort of stain , rust , dirt , mildew , spick , speck , spot , or spatter , from silk , satin , linen , cambric , cloth , crape , stuff , carpet , merino , muslin , bombazeen , or woollen stuff .
Wine-stains , fruit-stains , beer-stains , water-stains , paint-stains , pitch-stains , any stain , all come out at one rub with the infallible and invaluable composition .
If a lady stain her honour , she have only need to swallow one cake and she ’ s cure at once—for it ’ s poison .
If a gentleman want to prove this , he have only need to bolt one little square , and he have put it beyond question—for it ’ s quite as satisfactory a a pistol-bullet , and a great deal nastier in the flavour , consequently the more credit in take it .
One penny a square .
With all these virtue , one penny a square ! ” There be two buyer directly , and more of the listener plainly hesitate .
The vendor observe this , increase in loquacity .
“ It ’ s all buy up as fast a it can be make , ” say the fellow .
“ There be fourteen water-mills , six steam-engines , and a galvanic battery , always a-working upon it , and they can ’ t make it fast enough , though the men work so hard that they die off , and the widow be pension directly , with twenty pound a-year for each of the child , and a premium of fifty for twin .
One penny a square !
Two half-pence be all the same , and four farthing be receive with joy .
One penny a square !
Wine-stains , fruit-stains , beer-stains , water-stains , paint-stains , pitch-stains , mud-stains , blood-stains !
Here be a stain upon the hat of a gentleman in company , that I ’ ll take clean out , before he can order me a pint of ale. ” “ Hah ! ” cry Sikes start up .
“ Give that back. ” “ I ’ ll take it clean out , sir , ” reply the man , wink to the company , “ before you can come across the room to get it .
Gentlemen all , observe the dark stain upon this gentleman ’ s hat , no wider than a shilling , but thick than a half-crown .
Whether it be a wine-stain , fruit-stain , beer-stain , water-stain , paint-stain , pitch-stain , mud-stain , or blood-stain— ” The man get no further , for Sikes with a hideous imprecation overthrow the table , and tear the hat from him , burst out of the house .
With the same perversity of feeling and irresolution that have fasten upon him , despite himself , all day , the murderer , find that he be not follow , and that they most probably consider him some drunken sullen fellow , turn back up the town , and get out of the glare of the lamp of a stage-coach that be stand in the street , be walk past , when he recognise the mail from London , and saw that it be stand at the little post-office .
He almost know what be to come ; but he cross over , and listen .
The guard be stand at the door , wait for the letter-bag .
A man , dress like a game-keeper , come up at the moment , and he hand him a basket which lay ready on the pavement .
“ That ’ s for your people , ” say the guard .
“ Now , look alive in there , will you .
Damn that ’ ere bag , it warn ’ t ready night afore last ; this win ’ t do , you know ! ” “ Anything new up in town , Ben ? ” ask the game-keeper , draw back to the window-shutters , the good to admire the horse .
“ No , nothing that I know on , ” reply the man , pull on his glove .
“ Corn ’ s up a little .
I heerd talk of a murder , too , down Spitalfields way , but I don ’ t reckon much upon it. ” “ Oh , that ’ s quite true , ” say a gentleman inside , who be look out of the window .
“ And a dreadful murder it was. ” “ Was it , sir ? ” rejoin the guard , touch his hat .
“ Man or woman , pray , sir ? ” “ A woman , ” reply the gentleman .
“ It be supposed— ” “ Now , Ben , ” reply the coachman impatiently .
“ Damn that ’ ere bag , ” say the guard ; “ be you go to sleep in there ? ” “ Coming ! ” cry the office keeper , run out .
“ Coming , ” growl the guard .
“ Ah , and so ’ s the young ’ ooman of property that ’ s go to take a fancy to me , but I don ’ t know when .
Here , give hold .
All ri—ight ! ” The horn sound a few cheerful note , and the coach be go .
Sikes remain stand in the street , apparently unmoved by what he have just hear , and agitate by no strong feeling than a doubt where to go .
At length he go back again , and take the road which lead from Hatfield to St. Albans .
He go on doggedly ; but a he leave the town behind him , and plunge into the solitude and darkness of the road , he felt a dread and awe creep upon him which shake him to the core .
Every object before him , substance or shadow , still or move , take the semblance of some fearful thing ; but these fear be nothing compare to the sense that haunt him of that morning ’ s ghastly figure follow at his heel .
He could trace it shadow in the gloom , supply the small item of the outline , and note how stiff and solemn it seem to stalk along .
He could hear it garment rustle in the leaf , and every breath of wind come laden with that last low cry .
If he stop it do the same .
If he run , it followed—not run too : that would have be a relief : but like a corpse endow with the mere machinery of life , and borne on one slow melancholy wind that never rise or fell .
At time , he turn , with desperate determination , resolve to beat this phantom off , though it should look him dead ; but the hair rise on his head , and his blood stand still , for it have turn with him and be behind him then .
He have keep it before him that morning , but it be behind now—always .
He lean his back against a bank , and felt that it stand above him , visibly out against the cold night-sky .
He throw himself upon the road—on his back upon the road .
At his head it stand , silent , erect , and still—a living grave-stone , with it epitaph in blood .
Let no man talk of murderer escape justice , and hint that Providence must sleep .
There be twenty score of violent death in one long minute of that agony of fear .
There be a shed in a field he pass , that offer shelter for the night .
Before the door , be three tall poplar tree , which make it very dark within ; and the wind moan through them with a dismal wail .
He _could not_ walk on , till daylight come again ; and here he stretch himself close to the wall—to undergo new torture .
For now , a vision come before him , a constant and more terrible than that from which he have escape .
Those widely star eye , so lustreless and so glassy , that he have well borne to see them than think upon them , appear in the midst of the darkness : light in themselves , but give light to nothing .
There be but two , but they be everywhere .
If he shut out the sight , there come the room with every well-known object—some , indeed , that he would have forget , if he have go over it content from memory—each in it accustomed place .
The body be in _its_ place , and it eye be a he saw them when he steal away .
He get up , and rush into the field without .
The figure be behind him .
He re-enter the shed , and shrink down once more .
The eye be there , before he have lay himself along .
And here he remain in such terror a none but he can know , tremble in every limb , and the cold sweat start from every pore , when suddenly there arose upon the night-wind the noise of distant shouting , and the roar of voice mingle in alarm and wonder .
Any sound of men in that lonely place , even though it convey a real cause of alarm , be something to him .
He regain his strength and energy at the prospect of personal danger ; and spring to his foot , rush into the open air .
The broad sky seem on fire .
Rising into the air with shower of spark , and roll one above the other , be sheet of flame , light the atmosphere for mile round , and drive cloud of smoke in the direction where he stand .
The shout grow louder a new voice swell the roar , and he could hear the cry of Fire !
mingle with the ringing of an alarm-bell , the fall of heavy body , and the crackling of flame a they twin round some new obstacle , and shot aloft a though refresh by food .
The noise increase a he look .
There be people there—men and women—light , bustle .
It be like new life to him .
He dart onward—straight , headlong—dashing through brier and brake , and leap gate and fence as madly a his dog , who career with loud and sound bark before him .
He come upon the spot .
There be half-dressed figure tear to and fro , some endeavour to drag the frightened horse from the stable , others drive the cattle from the yard and out-houses , and others come laden from the burn pile , amidst a shower of fall spark , and the tumble down of red-hot beam .
The aperture , where door and window stand an hour ago , disclose a mass of rag fire ; wall rock and crumble into the burning well ; the molten lead and iron pour down , white hot , upon the ground .
Women and child shriek , and men encourage each other with noisy shout and cheer .
The clanking of the engine-pumps , and the spirting and hissing of the water a it fell upon the blazing wood , add to the tremendous roar .
He shout , too , till he be hoarse ; and fly from memory and himself , plunge into the thickest of the throng .
Hither and thither he dive that night : now work at the pump , and now hurry through the smoke and flame , but never cease to engage himself wherever noise and men be thick .
Up and down the ladder , upon the roof of building , over floor that quake and tremble with his weight , under the lee of fall brick and stone , in every part of that great fire be he ; but he bore a charmed life , and have neither scratch nor bruise , nor weariness nor thought , till morning dawn again , and only smoke and blacken ruin remain .
This mad excitement over , there return , with ten-fold force , the dreadful consciousness of his crime .
He look suspiciously about him , for the men be converse in group , and he fear to be the subject of their talk .
The dog obey the significant beck of his finger , and they draw off , stealthily , together .
He pass near an engine where some men be seat , and they call to him to share in their refreshment .
He take some bread and meat ; and a he drink a draught of beer , hear the fireman , who be from London , talk about the murder .
“ He have go to Birmingham , they say , ” say one : “ but they ’ ll have him yet , for the scout be out , and by to-morrow night there ’ ll be a cry all through the country. ” He hurry off , and walk till he almost drop upon the ground ; then lay down in a lane , and have a long , but broken and uneasy sleep .
He wander on again , irresolute and undecided , and oppress with the fear of another solitary night .
Suddenly , he take the desperate resolution to go back to London .
“ There ’ s somebody to speak to there , at all event , ” he think .
“ A good hiding-place , too .
They ’ ll never expect to nab me there , after this country scent .
Why can ’ t I lie by for a week or so , and , force blunt from Fagin , get abroad to France ?
Damme , I ’ ll risk it. ” He act upon this impulse without delay , and choose the least frequented road begin his journey back , resolve to lie conceal within a short distance of the metropolis , and , enter it at dusk by a circuitous route , to proceed straight to that part of it which he have fix on for his destination .
The dog , though .
If any description of him be out , it would not be forget that the dog be miss , and have probably go with him .
This might lead to his apprehension a he pass along the street .
He resolve to drown him , and walk on , look about for a pond : pick up a heavy stone and tie it to his handkerchief a he go .
The animal look up into his master ’ s face while these preparation be make ; whether his instinct apprehend something of their purpose , or the robber ’ s sidelong look at him be stern than ordinary , he skulk a little farther in the rear than usual , and cower a he come more slowly along .
When his master halt at the brink of a pool , and look round to call him , he stop outright .
“ Do you hear me call ?
Come here ! ” cry Sikes .
The animal come up from the very force of habit ; but a Sikes stoop to attach the handkerchief to his throat , he utter a low growl and start back .
“ Come back ! ” say the robber .
The dog wag his tail , but move not .
Sikes make a running noose and call him again .
The dog advance , retreat , pause an instant , and scour away at his hard speed .
The man whistle again and again , and sit down and wait in the expectation that he would return .
But no dog appear , and at length he resume his journey .
CHAPTER XLIX .
MONKS AND MR. BROWNLOW AT LENGTH MEET .
THEIR CONVERSATION , AND THE INTELLIGENCE THAT INTERRUPTS IT The twilight be begin to close in , when Mr. Brownlow alight from a hackney-coach at his own door , and knock softly .
The door be open , a sturdy man get out of the coach and station himself on one side of the step , while another man , who have be seat on the box , dismount too , and stand upon the other side .
At a sign from Mr. Brownlow , they help out a third man , and take him between them , hurry him into the house .
This man be Monks .
They walk in the same manner up the stair without speaking , and Mr. Brownlow , precede them , lead the way into a back-room .
At the door of this apartment , Monks , who have ascend with evident reluctance , stop .
The two men look at the old gentleman a if for instruction .
“ He know the alternative , ” say Mr. Browlow .
“ If he hesitate or move a finger but a you bid him , drag him into the street , call for the aid of the police , and impeach him a a felon in my name. ” “ How dare you say this of me ? ” ask Monks .
“ How dare you urge me to it , young man ? ” reply Mr. Brownlow , confront him with a steady look .
“ Are you mad enough to leave this house ?
Unhand him .
There , sir .
You be free to go , and we to follow .
But I warn you , by all I hold most solemn and most sacred , that instant will have you apprehend on a charge of fraud and robbery .
I be resolute and immoveable .
If you be determine to be the same , your blood be upon your own head ! ” “ By what authority be I kidnap in the street , and bring here by these dog ? ” ask Monks , look from one to the other of the men who stand beside him .
“ By mine , ” reply Mr. Brownlow .
“ Those person be indemnify by me .
If you complain of be deprive of your liberty—you have power and opportunity to retrieve it a you come along , but you deem it advisable to remain quiet—I say again , throw yourself for protection on the law .
I will appeal to the law too ; but when you have go too far to recede , do not sue to me for leniency , when the power will have pass into other hand ; and do not say I plunge you down the gulf into which you rush , yourself. ” Monks be plainly disconcert , and alarm besides .
He hesitate .
“ You will decide quickly , ” say Mr. Brownlow , with perfect firmness and composure .
“ If you wish me to prefer my charge publicly , and consign you to a punishment the extent of which , although I can , with a shudder , foresee , I can not control , once more , I say , for you know the way .
If not , and you appeal to my forbearance , and the mercy of those you have deeply injure , seat yourself , without a word , in that chair .
It have wait for you two whole days. ” Monks mutter some unintelligible word , but waver still .
“ You will be prompt , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ A word from me , and the alternative have go for ever. ” Still the man hesitate .
“ I have not the inclination to parley , ” say Mr. Brownlow , “ and , a I advocate the dear interest of others , I have not the right. ” “ Is there— ” demand Monks with a faltering tongue , — “ be there—no middle course ? ” “ None. ” Monks look at the old gentleman , with an anxious eye ; but , read in his countenance nothing but severity and determination , walk into the room , and , shrug his shoulder , sit down .
“ Lock the door on the outside , ” say Mr. Brownlow to the attendant , “ and come when I ring. ” The men obey , and the two be leave alone together .
“ This be pretty treatment , sir , ” say Monks , throw down his hat and cloak , “ from my father ’ s old friend. ” “ It be because I be your father ’ s old friend , young man , ” return Mr. Brownlow ; “ it be because the hope and wish of young and happy year be bind up with him , and that fair creature of his blood and kindred who rejoin her God in youth , and leave me here a solitary , lonely man : it be because he kneel with me beside his only sister ’ s death-bed when he be yet a boy , on the morning that would—but Heaven will otherwise—have make her my young wife ; it be because my seared heart clung to him , from that time forth , through all his trial and error , till he die ; it be because old recollection and association fill my heart , and even the sight of you bring with it old thought of him ; it be because of all these thing that I be move to treat you gently now—yes , Edward Leeford , even now—and blush for your unworthiness who bear the name. ” “ What have the name to do with it ? ” ask the other , after contemplate , half in silence , and half in dogged wonder , the agitation of his companion .
“ What be the name to me ? ” “ Nothing , ” reply Mr. Brownlow , “ nothing to you .
But it be _hers_ , and even at this distance of time bring back to me , an old man , the glow and thrill which I once felt , only to hear it repeat by a stranger .
I be very glad you have change it—very—very. ” “ This be all mighty fine , ” say Monks ( to retain his assumed designation ) after a long silence , during which he have jerk himself in sullen defiance to and fro , and Mr. Brownlow have sit , shade his face with his hand .
“ But what do you want with me ? ” “ You have a brother , ” say Mr. Brownlow , rouse himself : “ a brother , the whisper of whose name in your ear when I come behind you in the street , be , in itself , almost enough to make you accompany me hither , in wonder and alarm. ” “ I have no brother , ” reply Monks .
“ You know I be an only child .
Why do you talk to me of brother ?
You know that , as well a I. ” “ Attend to what I do know , and you may not , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ I shall interest you by and by .
I know that of the wretched marriage , into which family pride , and the most sordid and narrow of all ambition , force your unhappy father when a mere boy , you be the sole and most unnatural issue. ” “ I don ’ t care for hard name , ” interrupt Monks with a jeering laugh .
“ You know the fact , and that ’ s enough for me. ” “ But I also know , ” pursue the old gentleman , “ the misery , the slow torture , the protracted anguish of that ill-assorted union .
I know how listlessly and wearily each of that wretched pair drag on their heavy chain through a world that be poison to them both .
I know how cold formality be succeed by open taunt ; how indifference give place to dislike , dislike to hate , and hate to loathing , until at last they wrench the clank bond asunder , and retire a wide space apart , carry each a galling fragment , of which nothing but death could break the rivet , to hide it in new society beneath the gay look they could assume .
Your mother succeed ; she forget it soon .
But it rust and canker at your father ’ s heart for years. ” “ Well , they be separate , ” say Monks , “ and what of that ? ” “ When they have be separate for some time , ” return Mr. Brownlow , “ and your mother , wholly give up to continental frivolity , have utterly forget the young husband ten good year her junior , who , with prospect blight , linger on at home , he fell among new friend .
This circumstance , at least , you know already. ” “ Not I , ” say Monks , turn away his eye and beat his foot upon the ground , a a man who be determine to deny everything .
“ Not I. ” “ Your manner , no less than your action , assures me that you have never forget it , or cease to think of it with bitterness , ” return Mr. Brownlow .
“ I speak of fifteen year ago , when you be not more than eleven year old , and your father but one-and-thirty—for he be , I repeat , a boy , when _his_ father order him to marry .
Must I go back to event which cast a shade upon the memory of your parent , or will you spare it , and disclose to me the truth ? ” “ I have nothing to disclose , ” rejoin Monks .
“ You must talk on if you will. ” “ These new friend , then , ” say Mr. Brownlow , “ be a naval officer retire from active service , whose wife have die some half-a-year before , and leave him with two children—there have be more , but , of all their family , happily but two survive .
They be both daughter ; one a beautiful creature of nineteen , and the other a mere child of two or three year old. ” “ What ’ s this to me ? ” ask Monks .
“ They reside , ” say Mr. Brownlow , without seem to hear the interruption , “ in a part of the country to which your father in his wandering have repair , and where he have take up his abode .
Acquaintance , intimacy , friendship , fast follow on each other .
Your father be gift a few men be .
He have his sister ’ s soul and person .
As the old officer know him more and more , he grow to love him .
I would that it have end there .
His daughter do the same. ” The old gentleman pause ; Monks be bite his lip , with his eye fix upon the floor ; see this , he immediately resume : “ The end of a year find him contract , solemnly contract , to that daughter ; the object of the first , true , ardent , only passion of a guileless girl. ” “ Your tale be of the long , ” observed Monks , move restlessly in his chair .
“ It be a true tale of grief and trial , and sorrow , young man , ” return Mr. Brownlow , “ and such tale usually be ; if it be one of unmixed joy and happiness , it would be very brief .
At length one of those rich relation to strengthen whose interest and importance your father have be sacrifice , a others be often—it be no uncommon case—died , and to repair the misery he have be instrumental in occasion , leave him his panacea for all griefs—Money .
It be necessary that he should immediately repair to Rome , whither this man have speed for health , and where he have die , leave his affair in great confusion .
He go ; be seize with mortal illness there ; be follow , the moment the intelligence reach Paris , by your mother who carry you with her ; he die the day after her arrival , leave no will—_no will_—so that the whole property fell to her and you. ” At this part of the recital Monks hold his breath , and listen with a face of intense eagerness , though his eye be not direct towards the speaker .
As Mr. Brownlow pause , he change his position with the air of one who have experience a sudden relief , and wipe his hot face and hand .
“ Before he go abroad , and a he pass through London on his way , ” say Mr. Brownlow , slowly , and fix his eye upon the other ’ s face , “ he come to me. ” “ I never heard of that , ” interrupted Monks in a tone intend to appear incredulous , but savour more of disagreeable surprise .
“ He come to me , and leave with me , among some other thing , a picture—a portrait paint by himself—a likeness of this poor girl—which he do not wish to leave behind , and could not carry forward on his hasty journey .
He be wear by anxiety and remorse almost to a shadow ; talk in a wild , distracted way , of ruin and dishonour work by himself ; confide to me his intention to convert his whole property , at any loss , into money , and , have settle on his wife and you a portion of his recent acquisition , to fly the country—I guess too well he would not fly alone—and never see it more .
Even from me , his old and early friend , whose strong attachment have take root in the earth that cover one most dear to both—even from me he withhold any more particular confession , promise to write and tell me all , and after that to see me once again , for the last time on earth .
Alas !
_That_ be the last time .
I have no letter , and I never saw him more. ” “ I go , ” say Mr. Brownlow , after a short pause , “ I go , when all be over , to the scene of his—I will use the term the world would freely use , for worldly harshness or favour be now alike to him—of his guilty love , resolve that if my fear be realise that err child should find one heart and home to shelter and compassionate her .
The family have leave that part a week before ; they have call in such trifling debt a be outstanding , discharge them , and leave the place by night .
Why , or whither , none can tell. ” Monks draw his breath yet more freely , and look round with a smile of triumph .
“ When your brother , ” say Mr. Brownlow , draw nearer to the other ’ s chair , “ When your brother : a feeble , rag , neglect child : be cast in my way by a strong hand than chance , and rescue by me from a life of vice and infamy— ” “ What ? ” cried Monks .
“ By me , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ I tell you I should interest you before long .
I say by me—I see that your cunning associate suppress my name , although for aught he know , it would be quite strange to your ear .
When he be rescue by me , then , and lay recover from sickness in my house , his strong resemblance to this picture I have speak of , strike me with astonishment .
Even when I first saw him in all his dirt and misery , there be a lingering expression in his face that come upon me like a glimpse of some old friend flash on one in a vivid dream .
I need not tell you he be snare away before I know his history— ” “ Why not ? ” ask Monks hastily .
“ Because you know it well. ” “ I ! ” “ Denial to me be vain , ” reply Mr. Brownlow .
“ I shall show you that I know more than that. ” “ You—you—can ’ t prove anything against me , ” stammer Monks .
“ I defy you to do it ! ” “ We shall see , ” return the old gentleman with a search glance .
“ I lose the boy , and no effort of mine could recover him .
Your mother be dead , I know that you alone could solve the mystery if anybody could , and a when I have last heard of you you be on your own estate in the West Indies—whither , a you well know , you retire upon your mother ’ s death to escape the consequence of vicious course here—I make the voyage .
You have leave it , month before , and be suppose to be in London , but no one could tell where .
I return .
Your agent have no clue to your residence .
You come and go , they say , as strangely a you have ever do : sometimes for day together and sometimes not for month : keep to all appearance the same low haunt and mingle with the same infamous herd who have be your associate when a fierce ungovernable boy .
I weary them with new application .
I pace the street by night and day , but until two hour ago , all my effort be fruitless , and I never saw you for an instant. ” “ And now you do see me , ” say Monks , rise boldly , “ what then ?
Fraud and robbery be high-sounding words—justified , you think , by a fancied resemblance in some young imp to an idle daub of a dead man ’ s Brother !
You don ’ t even know that a child be bear of this maudlin pair ; you don ’ t even know that. ” “ I _did not_ , ” reply Mr. Brownlow , rise too ; “ but within the last fortnight I have learn it all .
You have a brother ; you know it , and him .
There be a will , which your mother destroy , leave the secret and the gain to you at her own death .
It contain a reference to some child likely to be the result of this sad connection , which child be bear , and accidentally encounter by you , when your suspicion be first awaken by his resemblance to your father .
You repair to the place of his birth .
There exist proofs—proofs long suppressed—of his birth and parentage .
Those proof be destroy by you , and now , in your own word to your accomplice the Jew , ‘ _the only proof of the boy ’ s identity lie at the bottom of the river , and the old hag that receive them from the mother be rot in her coffin_. ’ Unworthy son , coward , liar , —you , who hold your council with thief and murderer in dark room at night , —you , whose plot and wile have bring a violent death upon the head of one worth million such a you , —you , who from your cradle be gall and bitterness to your own father ’ s heart , and in whom all evil passion , vice , and profligacy , fester , till they find a vent in a hideous disease which have make your face an index even to your mind—you , Edward Leeford , do you still brave me ! ” “ No , no , no ! ” return the coward , overwhelm by these accumulate charge .
“ Every word ! ” cry the gentleman , “ every word that have pass between you and this detested villain , be know to me .
Shadows on the wall have catch your whisper , and bring them to my ear ; the sight of the persecute child have turn vice itself , and give it the courage and almost the attribute of virtue .
Murder have be do , to which you be morally if not really a party. ” “ No , no , ” interposed Monks .
“ I—I know nothing of that ; I be go to inquire the truth of the story when you overtake me .
I didn ’ t know the cause .
I think it be a common quarrel. ” “ It be the partial disclosure of your secret , ” reply Mr. Brownlow .
“ Will you disclose the whole ? ” “ Yes , I will. ” “ Set your hand to a statement of truth and fact , and repeat it before witness ? ” “ That I promise too. ” “ Remain quietly here , until such a document be draw up , and proceed with me to such a place a I may deem most advisable , for the purpose of attest it ? ” “ If you insist upon that , I ’ ll do that also , ” reply Monks .
“ You must do more than that , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ Make restitution to an innocent and unoffending child , for such he be , although the offspring of a guilty and most miserable love .
You have not forget the provision of the will .
Carry them into execution so far a your brother be concern , and then go where you please .
In this world you need meet no more. ” While Monks be pace up and down , meditate with dark and evil look on this proposal and the possibility of evade it : tear by his fear on the one hand and his hatred on the other : the door be hurriedly unlocked , and a gentleman ( Mr. Losberne ) enter the room in violent agitation .
“ The man will be take , ” he cry .
“ He will be take to-night ! ” “ The murderer ? ” ask Mr. Brownlow .
“ Yes , yes , ” reply the other .
“ His dog have be see lurk about some old haunt , and there seem little doubt that his master either be , or will be , there , under cover of the darkness .
Spies be hover about in every direction .
I have speak to the men who be charge with his capture , and they tell me he can not escape .
A reward of a hundred pound be proclaim by Government to-night. ” “ I will give fifty more , ” say Mr. Brownlow , “ and proclaim it with my own lip upon the spot , if I can reach it .
Where be Mr. Maylie ? ” “ Harry ?
As soon a he have see your friend here , safe in a coach with you , he hurry off to where he hear this , ” reply the doctor , “ and mount his horse sallied forth to join the first party at some place in the outskirt agree upon between them. ” “ Fagin , ” say Mr. Brownlow ; “ what of him ? ” “ When I last heard , he have not be take , but he will be , or be , by this time .
They ’ re sure of him. ” “ Have you make up your mind ? ” ask Mr. Brownlow , in a low voice , of Monks .
“ Yes , ” he reply .
“ You—you—will be secret with me ? ” “ I will .
Remain here till I return .
It be your only hope of safety. ” They leave the room , and the door be again lock .
“ What have you do ? ” ask the doctor in a whisper .
“ All that I could hope to do , and even more .
Coupling the poor girl ’ s intelligence with my previous knowledge , and the result of our good friend ’ s inquiry on the spot , I leave him no loophole of escape , and lay bare the whole villainy which by these light become plain a day .
Write and appoint the evening after to-morrow , at seven , for the meeting .
We shall be down there , a few hour before , but shall require rest : especially the young lady , who _may_ have great need of firmness than either you or I can quite foresee just now .
But my blood boil to avenge this poor murdered creature .
Which way have they take ? ” “ Drive straight to the office and you will be in time , ” reply Mr. Losberne .
“ I will remain here. ” The two gentleman hastily separate ; each in a fever of excitement wholly uncontrollable .
CHAPTER L. THE PURSUIT AND ESCAPE Near to that part of the Thames on which the church at Rotherhithe abuts , where the building on the bank be dirty and the vessel on the river blackest with the dust of collier and the smoke of close-built low-roofed house , there exist the filthy , the strange , the most extraordinary of the many locality that be hide in London , wholly unknown , even by name , to the great mass of it inhabitant .
To reach this place , the visitor have to penetrate through a maze of close , narrow , and muddy street , throng by the roughest and poorest of waterside people , and devote to the traffic they may be suppose to occasion .
The cheap and least delicate provision be heap in the shop ; the coarsest and common article of wear apparel dangle at the salesman ’ s door , and stream from the house-parapet and window .
Jostling with unemployed labourer of the low class , ballast-heavers , coal-whippers , brazen woman , rag child , and the raff and refuse of the river , he make his way with difficulty along , assail by offensive sight and smell from the narrow alley which branch off on the right and leave , and deafen by the clash of ponderous waggon that bear great pile of merchandise from the stack of warehouse that rise from every corner .
Arriving , at length , in street remote and less-frequented than those through which he have pass , he walk beneath totter house-fronts project over the pavement , dismantle wall that seem to totter a he pass , chimney half crushed half hesitate to fall , window guard by rusty iron bar that time and dirt have almost eat away , every imaginable sign of desolation and neglect .
In such a neighborhood , beyond Dockhead in the Borough of Southwark , stand Jacob ’ s Island , surround by a muddy ditch , six or eight foot deep and fifteen or twenty wide when the tide be in , once call Mill Pond , but know in the day of this story a Folly Ditch .
It be a creek or inlet from the Thames , and can always be fill at high water by open the sluice at the Lead Mills from which it take it old name .
At such time , a stranger , look from one of the wooden bridge throw across it at Mill Lane , will see the inhabitant of the house on either side lower from their back door and window , bucket , pail , domestic utensil of all kind , in which to haul the water up ; and when his eye be turn from these operation to the house themselves , his utmost astonishment will be excite by the scene before him .
Crazy wooden gallery common to the back of half a dozen house , with hole from which to look upon the slime beneath ; window , break and patch , with pole thrust out , on which to dry the linen that be never there ; room so small , so filthy , so confined , that the air would seem too tainted even for the dirt and squalor which they shelter ; wooden chamber thrust themselves out above the mud , and threaten to fall into it—as some have do ; dirt-besmeared wall and decay foundation ; every repulsive lineament of poverty , every loathsome indication of filth , rot , and garbage ; all these ornament the bank of Folly Ditch .
In Jacob ’ s Island , the warehouse be roofless and empty ; the wall be crumble down ; the window be windows no more ; the door be fall into the street ; the chimney be blacken , but they yield no smoke .
Thirty or forty year ago , before loss and chancery suit come upon it , it be a thriving place ; but now it be a desolate island indeed .
The house have no owner ; they be broken open , and enter upon by those who have the courage ; and there they live , and there they die .
They must have powerful motif for a secret residence , or be reduce to a destitute condition indeed , who seek a refuge in Jacob ’ s Island .
In an upper room of one of these houses—a detach house of fair size , ruinous in other respect , but strongly defend at door and window : of which house the back command the ditch in manner already described—there be assemble three men , who , regard each other every now and then with look expressive of perplexity and expectation , sit for some time in profound and gloomy silence .
One of these be Toby Crackit , another Mr. Chitling , and the third a robber of fifty year , whose nose have be almost beat in , in some old scuffle , and whose face bore a frightful scar which might probably be trace to the same occasion .
This man be a returned transport , and his name be Kags .
“ I wish , ” say Toby turn to Mr. Chitling , “ that you have pick out some other crib when the two old one get too warm , and have not come here , my fine feller. ” “ Why didn ’ t you , blunder-head ! ” say Kags .
“ Well , I think you ’ d have be a little more glad to see me than this , ” reply Mr. Chitling , with a melancholy air .
“ Why , look ’ e , young gentleman , ” say Toby , “ when a man keep himself so very ex-clusive a I have do , and by that mean have a snug house over his head with nobody a prying and smell about it , it ’ s rather a startling thing to have the honour of a wisit from a young gentleman ( however respectable and pleasant a person he may be to play card with at conweniency ) circumstanced a you are. ” “ Especially , when the exclusive young man have get a friend stop with him , that ’ s arrive sooner than be expect from foreign part , and be too modest to want to be present to the Judges on his return , ” add Mr. Kags .
There be a short silence , after which Toby Crackit , seem to abandon a hopeless any further effort to maintain his usual devil-may-care swagger , turn to Chitling and say , “ When be Fagin take then ? ” “ Just at dinner-time—two o ’ clock this afternoon .
Charley and I make our lucky up the wash-us chimney , and Bolter get into the empty water-butt , head downwards ; but his leg be so precious long that they stick out at the top , and so they take him too. ” “ And Bet ? ” “ Poor Bet !
She go to see the Body , to speak to who it be , ” reply Chitling , his countenance fall more and more , “ and go off mad , scream and raving , and beat her head against the board ; so they put a strait-weskut on her and take her to the hospital—and there she is. ” “ Wot ’ s come of young Bates ? ” demand Kags .
“ He hang about , not to come over here afore dark , but he ’ ll be here soon , ” reply Chitling .
“ There ’ s nowhere else to go to now , for the people at the Cripples be all in custody , and the bar of the ken—I go up there and see it with my own eyes—is fill with traps. ” “ This be a smash , ” observe Toby , bite his lip .
“ There ’ s more than one will go with this. ” “ The session be on , ” say Kags : “ if they get the inquest over , and Bolter turn King ’ s evidence : a of course he will , from what he ’ s say already : they can prove Fagin an accessory before the fact , and get the trial on on Friday , and he ’ ll swing in six day from this , by G— ! ” “ You should have hear the people groan , ” say Chitling ; “ the officer fight like devil , or they ’ d have tear him away .
He be down once , but they make a ring round him , and fight their way along .
You should have see how he look about him , all muddy and bleeding , and clung to them a if they be his dear friend .
I can see ’ em now , not able to stand upright with the pressing of the mob , and draggin him along amongst ’ em ; I can see the people jump up , one behind another , and snarl with their teeth and make at him ; I can see the blood upon his hair and beard , and hear the cry with which the woman work themselves into the centre of the crowd at the street corner , and swore they ’ d tear his heart out ! ” The horror-stricken witness of this scene press his hand upon his ear , and with his eye close get up and pace violently to and fro , like one distract .
While he be thus engage , and the two men sit by in silence with their eye fix upon the floor , a pattering noise be hear upon the stair , and Sikes ’ s dog bound into the room .
They run to the window , downstairs , and into the street .
The dog have jump in at an open window ; he make no attempt to follow them , nor be his master to be see .
“ What ’ s the meaning of this ? ” say Toby when they have return .
“ He can ’ t be come here .
I—I—hope not. ” “ If he be come here , he ’ d have come with the dog , ” say Kags , stoop down to examine the animal , who lay pant on the floor .
“ Here !
Give u some water for him ; he have run himself faint. ” “ He ’ s drunk it all up , every drop , ” say Chitling after watch the dog some time in silence .
“ Covered with mud—lame—half blind—he must have come a long way. ” “ Where can he have come from ! ” exclaim Toby .
“ He ’ s be to the other ken of course , and find them fill with stranger come on here , where he ’ s be many a time and often .
But where can he have come from first , and how come he here alone without the other ! ” “ He ” — ( none of them call the murderer by his old name ) — “ He can ’ t have make away with himself .
What do you think ? ” say Chitling .
Toby shake his head .
“ If he have , ” say Kags , “ the dog ’ ud want to lead u away to where he do it .
No .
I think he ’ s get out of the country , and leave the dog behind .
He must have give him the slip somehow , or he wouldn ’ t be so easy. ” This solution , appear the most probable one , be adopt a the right ; the dog , creep under a chair , coil himself up to sleep , without more notice from anybody .
It be now dark , the shutter be close , and a candle light and place upon the table .
The terrible event of the last two day have make a deep impression on all three , increase by the danger and uncertainty of their own position .
They draw their chair closer together , start at every sound .
They speak little , and that in whisper , and be a silent and awe-stricken a if the remains of the murdered woman lay in the next room .
They have sit thus , some time , when suddenly be hear a hurried knocking at the door below .
“ Young Bates , ” say Kags , look angrily round , to check the fear he felt himself .
The knocking come again .
No , it wasn ’ t he .
He never knock like that .
Crackit go to the window , and shake all over , draw in his head .
There be no need to tell them who it be ; his pale face be enough .
The dog too be on the alert in an instant , and run whine to the door .
“ We must let him in , ” he say , take up the candle .
“ Isn ’ t there any help for it ? ” ask the other man in a hoarse voice .
“ None .
He _must_ come in. ” “ Don ’ t leave u in the dark , ” say Kags , take down a candle from the chimney-piece , and light it , with such a tremble hand that the knocking be twice repeat before he have finish .
Crackit go down to the door , and return follow by a man with the low part of his face bury in a handkerchief , and another tie over his head under his hat .
He draw them slowly off .
Blanched face , sunken eye , hollow cheek , beard of three day ’ growth , waste flesh , short thick breath ; it be the very ghost of Sikes .
He lay his hand upon a chair which stand in the middle of the room , but shudder a he be about to drop into it , and seem to glance over his shoulder , drag it back close to the wall—as close a it would go—and ground it against it—and sit down .
Not a word have be exchange .
He look from one to another in silence .
If an eye be furtively raise and meet his , it be instantly avert .
When his hollow voice break silence , they all three start .
They seem never to have hear it tone before .
“ How come that dog here ? ” he ask .
“ Alone .
Three hour ago. ” “ To-night ’ s paper say that Fagin ’ s take .
Is it true , or a lie ? ” “ True. ” They be silent again .
“ Damn you all ! ” say Sikes , pass his hand across his forehead .
“ Have you nothing to say to me ? ” There be an uneasy movement among them , but nobody speak .
“ You that keep this house , ” say Sikes , turn his face to Crackit , “ do you mean to sell me , or to let me lie here till this hunt be over ? ” “ You may stop here , if you think it safe , ” return the person address , after some hesitation .
Sikes carry his eye slowly up the wall behind him : rather try to turn his head than actually do it : and say , “ Is—it—the body—is it bury ? ” They shake their head .
“ Why isn ’ t it ! ” he retort with the same glance behind him .
“ Wot do they keep such ugly thing above the ground for ? —Who ’ s that knock ? ” Crackit intimate , by a motion of his hand a he leave the room , that there be nothing to fear ; and directly come back with Charley Bates behind him .
Sikes sit opposite the door , so that the moment the boy enter the room he encounter his figure .
“ Toby , ” say the boy fall back , a Sikes turn his eye towards him , “ why didn ’ t you tell me this , downstairs ? ” There have be something so tremendous in the shrink off of the three , that the wretched man be willing to propitiate even this lad .
Accordingly he nod , and make a though he would shake hand with him .
“ Let me go into some other room , ” say the boy , retreat still far .
“ Charley ! ” say Sikes , step forward .
“ Don ’ t you—don ’ t you know me ? ” “ Don ’ t come nearer me , ” answer the boy , still retreat , and look , with horror in his eye , upon the murderer ’ s face .
“ You monster ! ” The man stop half-way , and they look at each other ; but Sikes ’ s eye sink gradually to the ground .
“ Witness you three , ” cry the boy shake his clenched fist , and become more and more excited a he speak .
“ Witness you three—I ’ m not afraid of him—if they come here after him , I ’ ll give him up ; I will .
I tell you out at once .
He may kill me for it if he like , or if he dare , but if I be here I ’ ll give him up .
I ’ d give him up if he be to be boil alive .
Murder !
Help !
If there ’ s the pluck of a man among you three , you ’ ll help me .
Murder !
Help !
Down with him ! ” Pouring out these cry , and accompany them with violent gesticulation , the boy actually throw himself , single-handed , upon the strong man , and in the intensity of his energy and the suddenness of his surprise , bring him heavily to the ground .
The three spectator seem quite stupefy .
They offer no interference , and the boy and man roll on the ground together ; the former , heedless of the blow that shower upon him , wrench his hand tighter and tighter in the garment about the murderer ’ s breast , and never cease to call for help with all his might .
The contest , however , be too unequal to last long .
Sikes have him down , and his knee be on his throat , when Crackit pull him back with a look of alarm , and point to the window .
There be light gleam below , voice in loud and earnest conversation , the tramp of hurried footsteps—endless they seem in number—crossing the near wooden bridge .
One man on horseback seem to be among the crowd ; for there be the noise of hoof rattle on the uneven pavement .
The gleam of light increase ; the footstep come more thickly and noisily on .
Then , come a loud knocking at the door , and then a hoarse murmur from such a multitude of angry voice as would have make the bold quail .
“ Help ! ” shriek the boy in a voice that rent the air .
“ He ’ s here !
Break down the door ! ” “ In the King ’ s name , ” cry the voice without ; and the hoarse cry arose again , but louder .
“ Break down the door ! ” scream the boy .
“ I tell you they ’ ll never open it .
Run straight to the room where the light be .
Break down the door ! ” Strokes , thick and heavy , rattle upon the door and low window-shutters a he cease to speak , and a loud huzzah burst from the crowd ; give the listener , for the first time , some adequate idea of it immense extent .
“ Open the door of some place where I can lock this screech Hell-babe , ” cry Sikes fiercely ; run to and fro , and drag the boy , now , as easily a if he be an empty sack .
“ That door .
Quick ! ” He fling him in , bolt it , and turn the key .
“ Is the downstairs door fast ? ” “ Double-locked and chain , ” reply Crackit , who , with the other two men , still remain quite helpless and bewilder .
“ The panels—are they strong ? ” “ Lined with sheet-iron. ” “ And the window too ? ” “ Yes , and the windows. ” “ Damn you ! ” cry the desperate ruffian , throw up the sash and menace the crowd .
“ Do your worst !
I ’ ll cheat you yet ! ” Of all the terrific yell that ever fell on mortal ear , none could exceed the cry of the infuriated throng .
Some shout to those who be nearest to set the house on fire ; others roar to the officer to shoot him dead .
Among them all , none show such fury a the man on horseback , who , throw himself out of the saddle , and burst through the crowd a if he be part water , cry , beneath the window , in a voice that rise above all others , “ Twenty guinea to the man who bring a ladder ! ” The near voice take up the cry , and hundred echo it .
Some call for ladder , some for sledge-hammers ; some ran with torch to and fro a if to seek them , and still come back and roar again ; some spend their breath in impotent curse and execration ; some press forward with the ecstasy of madman , and thus impede the progress of those below ; some among the bold attempt to climb up by the water-spout and crevice in the wall ; and all wave to and fro , in the darkness beneath , like a field of corn move by an angry wind : and join from time to time in one loud furious roar .
“ The tide , ” cry the murderer , a he stagger back into the room , and shut the face out , “ the tide be in a I come up .
Give me a rope , a long rope .
They ’ re all in front .
I may drop into the Folly Ditch , and clear off that way .
Give me a rope , or I shall do three more murder and kill myself. ” The panic-stricken men point to where such article be keep ; the murderer , hastily select the long and strong cord , hurry up to the house-top .
All the window in the rear of the house have be long ago bricked up , except one small trap in the room where the boy be lock , and that be too small even for the passage of his body .
But , from this aperture , he have never cease to call on those without , to guard the back ; and thus , when the murderer emerge at last on the house-top by the door in the roof , a loud shout proclaim the fact to those in front , who immediately begin to pour round , press upon each other in an unbroken stream .
He plant a board , which he have carry up with him for the purpose , so firmly against the door that it must be matter of great difficulty to open it from the inside ; and creep over the tile , look over the low parapet .
The water be out , and the ditch a bed of mud .
The crowd have be hush during these few moment , watch his motion and doubtful of his purpose , but the instant they perceive it and know it be defeat , they raise a cry of triumphant execration to which all their previous shouting have be whisper .
Again and again it rise .
Those who be at too great a distance to know it meaning , take up the sound ; it echo and re-echoed ; it seem a though the whole city have pour it population out to curse him .
On press the people from the front—on , on , on , in a strong struggle current of angry face , with here and there a glaring torch to lighten them up , and show them out in all their wrath and passion .
The house on the opposite side of the ditch have be enter by the mob ; sash be throw up , or tear bodily out ; there be tier and tier of face in every window ; cluster upon cluster of people cling to every house-top .
Each little bridge ( and there be three in sight ) bent beneath the weight of the crowd upon it .
Still the current pour on to find some nook or hole from which to vent their shout , and only for an instant see the wretch .
“ They have him now , ” cry a man on the near bridge .
“ Hurrah ! ” The crowd grow light with uncovered head ; and again the shout uprose .
“ I will give fifty pound , ” cry an old gentleman from the same quarter , “ to the man who take him alive .
I will remain here , till he come to ask me for it. ” There be another roar .
At this moment the word be pass among the crowd that the door be force at last , and that he who have first call for the ladder have mount into the room .
The stream abruptly turn , a this intelligence run from mouth to mouth ; and the people at the window , see those upon the bridge pour back , quit their station , and run into the street , join the concourse that now throng pell-mell to the spot they have leave : each man crush and strive with his neighbor , and all pant with impatience to get near the door , and look upon the criminal a the officer bring him out .
The cry and shriek of those who be press almost to suffocation , or trample down and trodden under foot in the confusion , be dreadful ; the narrow way be completely block up ; and at this time , between the rush of some to regain the space in front of the house , and the unavailing struggle of others to extricate themselves from the mass , the immediate attention be distract from the murderer , although the universal eagerness for his capture be , if possible , increase .
The man have shrink down , thoroughly quell by the ferocity of the crowd , and the impossibility of escape ; but see this sudden change with no less rapidity than it have occur , he spring upon his foot , determine to make one last effort for his life by drop into the ditch , and , at the risk of be stifle , endeavour to creep away in the darkness and confusion .
Roused into new strength and energy , and stimulate by the noise within the house which announce that an entrance have really be effect , he set his foot against the stack of chimney , fasten one end of the rope tightly and firmly round it , and with the other make a strong running noose by the aid of his hand and teeth almost in a second .
He could let himself down by the cord to within a less distance of the ground than his own height , and have his knife ready in his hand to cut it then and drop .
At the very instant when he bring the loop over his head previous to slip it beneath his arm-pits , and when the old gentleman before-mentioned ( who have cling so tight to the railing of the bridge a to resist the force of the crowd , and retain his position ) earnestly warn those about him that the man be about to lower himself down—at that very instant the murderer , look behind him on the roof , throw his arm above his head , and utter a yell of terror .
“ The eye again ! ” he cry in an unearthly screech .
Staggering a if strike by lightning , he lose his balance and tumble over the parapet .
The noose be on his neck .
It run up with his weight , tight a a bow-string , and swift a the arrow it speed .
He fell for five-and-thirty foot .
There be a sudden jerk , a terrific convulsion of the limb ; and there he hang , with the open knife clench in his stiffening hand .
The old chimney quiver with the shock , but stand it bravely .
The murderer swung lifeless against the wall ; and the boy , thrust aside the dangling body which obscure his view , call to the people to come and take him out , for God ’ s sake .
A dog , which have lain conceal till now , run backwards and forward on the parapet with a dismal howl , and collect himself for a spring , jump for the dead man ’ s shoulder .
Missing his aim , he fell into the ditch , turn completely over a he go ; and strike his head against a stone , dash out his brain .
CHAPTER LI .
AFFORDING AN EXPLANATION OF MORE MYSTERIES THAN ONE , AND COMPREHENDING A PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE WITH NO WORD OF SETTLEMENT OR PIN-MONEY The event narrate in the last chapter be yet but two day old , when Oliver find himself , at three o ’ clock in the afternoon , in a travelling-carriage rolling fast towards his native town .
Mrs. Maylie , and Rose , and Mrs. Bedwin , and the good doctor be with him : and Mr. Brownlow follow in a post-chaise , accompany by one other person whose name have not be mention .
They have not talk much upon the way ; for Oliver be in a flutter of agitation and uncertainty which deprive him of the power of collect his thought , and almost of speech , and appear to have scarcely less effect on his companion , who share it , in at least an equal degree .
He and the two lady have be very carefully make acquaint by Mr. Brownlow with the nature of the admission which have be force from Monks ; and although they know that the object of their present journey be to complete the work which have be so well begin , still the whole matter be envelop in enough of doubt and mystery to leave them in endurance of the most intense suspense .
The same kind friend have , with Mr. Losberne ’ s assistance , cautiously stop all channel of communication through which they could receive intelligence of the dreadful occurrence that so recently take place .
“ It be quite true , ” he say , “ that they must know them before long , but it might be at a good time than the present , and it could not be at a worse. ” So , they travel on in silence : each busy with reflection on the object which have bring them together : and no one dispose to give utterance to the thought which crowd upon all .
But if Oliver , under these influence , have remain silent while they journey towards his birth-place by a road he have never see , how the whole current of his recollection run back to old time , and what a crowd of emotion be waken up in his breast , when they turn into that which he have traverse on foot : a poor houseless , wander boy , without a friend to help him , or a roof to shelter his head .
“ See there , there ! ” cry Oliver , eagerly clasp the hand of Rose , and point out at the carriage window ; “ that ’ s the stile I come over ; there be the hedge I creep behind , for fear any one should overtake me and force me back !
Yonder be the path across the field , lead to the old house where I be a little child !
Oh Dick , Dick , my dear old friend , if I could only see you now ! ” “ You will see him soon , ” reply Rose , gently take his folded hand between her own .
“ You shall tell him how happy you be , and how rich you have grow , and that in all your happiness you have none so great a the come back to make him happy too. ” “ Yes , yes , ” say Oliver , “ and we ’ ll—we ’ ll take him away from here , and have him clothe and teach , and send him to some quiet country place where he may grow strong and well , —shall we ? ” Rose nod “ yes , ” for the boy be smile through such happy tear that she could not speak .
“ You will be kind and good to him , for you be to every one , ” say Oliver .
“ It will make you cry , I know , to hear what he can tell ; but never mind , never mind , it will be all over , and you will smile again—I know that too—to think how changed he be ; you do the same with me .
He say ‘ God bless you ’ to me when I run away , ” cry the boy with a burst of affectionate emotion ; “ and I will say ‘ God bless you ’ now , and show him how I love him for it ! ” As they approach the town , and at length drive through it narrow street , it become matter of no small difficulty to restrain the boy within reasonable bound .
There be Sowerberry ’ s the undertaker ’ s just a it use to be , only small and less impose in appearance than he remember it—there be all the well-known shop and house , with almost every one of which he have some slight incident connected—there be Gamfield ’ s cart , the very cart he use to have , stand at the old public-house door—there be the workhouse , the dreary prison of his youthful day , with it dismal window frown on the street—there be the same lean porter stand at the gate , at sight of whom Oliver involuntarily shrink back , and then laugh at himself for be so foolish , then cry , then laugh again—there be score of face at the door and window that he know quite well—there be nearly everything a if he have leave it but yesterday , and all his recent life have be but a happy dream .
But it be pure , earnest , joyful reality .
They drive straight to the door of the chief hotel ( which Oliver use to stare up at , with awe , and think a mighty palace , but which have somehow fall off in grandeur and size ) ; and here be Mr. Grimwig all ready to receive them , kiss the young lady , and the old one too , when they get out of the coach , a if he be the grandfather of the whole party , all smile and kindness , and not offer to eat his head—no , not once ; not even when he contradict a very old postboy about the near road to London , and maintain he know it best , though he have only come that way once , and that time fast asleep .
There be dinner prepared , and there be bedroom ready , and everything be arrange a if by magic .
Notwithstanding all this , when the hurry of the first half-hour be over , the same silence and constraint prevail that have mark their journey down .
Mr. Brownlow do not join them at dinner , but remain in a separate room .
The two other gentleman hurry in and out with anxious face , and , during the short interval when they be present , conversed apart .
Once , Mrs. Maylie be call away , and after be absent for nearly an hour , return with eye swell with weeping .
All these thing make Rose and Oliver , who be not in any new secret , nervous and uncomfortable .
They sit wonder , in silence ; or , if they exchange a few word , speak in whisper , a if they be afraid to hear the sound of their own voice .
At length , when nine o ’ clock have come , and they begin to think they be to hear no more that night , Mr. Losberne and Mr. Grimwig enter the room , follow by Mr. Brownlow and a man whom Oliver almost shriek with surprise to see ; for they tell him it be his brother , and it be the same man he have meet at the market-town , and see look in with Fagin at the window of his little room .
Monks cast a look of hate , which , even then , he could not dissemble , at the astonished boy , and sit down near the door .
Mr. Brownlow , who have paper in his hand , walk to a table near which Rose and Oliver be seat .
“ This be a painful task , ” say he , “ but these declaration , which have be sign in London before many gentleman , must be in substance repeat here .
I would have spar you the degradation , but we must hear them from your own lip before we part , and you know why. ” “ Go on , ” say the person address , turn away his face .
“ Quick .
I have almost do enough , I think .
Don ’ t keep me here. ” “ This child , ” say Mr. Brownlow , draw Oliver to him , and lay his hand upon his head , “ be your half-brother ; the illegitimate son of your father , my dear friend Edwin Leeford , by poor young Agnes Fleming , who die in give him birth. ” “ Yes , ” say Monks , scowl at the tremble boy : the beating of whose heart he might have hear .
“ That be the bastard child. ” “ The term you use , ” say Mr. Brownlow , sternly , “ be a reproach to those long since pass beyond the feeble censure of the world .
It reflect disgrace on no one living , except you who use it .
Let that pas .
He be bear in this town. ” “ In the workhouse of this town , ” be the sullen reply .
“ You have the story there. ” He point impatiently to the paper a he speak .
“ I must have it here , too , ” say Mr. Brownlow , look round upon the listener .
“ Listen then !
You ! ” return Monks .
“ His father be take ill at Rome , be join by his wife , my mother , from whom he have be long separate , who go from Paris and take me with her—to look after his property , for what I know , for she have no great affection for him , nor he for her .
He know nothing of u , for his sens be go , and he slumber on till next day , when he die .
Among the paper in his desk , be two , date on the night his illness first come on , direct to yourself ” ; he address himself to Mr. Brownlow ; “ and enclose in a few short line to you , with an intimation on the cover of the package that it be not to be forward till after he be dead .
One of these paper be a letter to this girl Agnes ; the other a will. ” “ What of the letter ? ” ask Mr. Brownlow .
“ The letter ? —A sheet of paper cross and cross again , with a penitent confession , and prayer to God to help her .
He have palm a tale on the girl that some secret mystery—to be explain one day—prevented his marry her just then ; and so she have go on , trust patiently to him , until she trust too far , and lose what none could ever give her back .
She be , at that time , within a few month of her confinement .
He tell her all he have mean to do , to hide her shame , if he have live , and pray her , if he die , not to curse his memory , or think the consequence of their sin would be visit on her or their young child ; for all the guilt be his .
He remind her of the day he have give her the little locket and the ring with her christian name engrave upon it , and a blank leave for that which he hop one day to have bestow upon her—prayed her yet to keep it , and wear it next her heart , a she have do before—and then run on , wildly , in the same word , over and over again , a if he have go distract .
I believe he had. ” “ The will , ” say Mr. Brownlow , a Oliver ’ s tear fell fast .
Monks be silent .
“ The will , ” say Mr. Brownlow , speak for him , “ be in the same spirit a the letter .
He talk of misery which his wife have bring upon him ; of the rebellious disposition , vice , malice , and premature bad passion of you his only son , who have be train to hate him ; and leave you , and your mother , each an annuity of eight hundred pound .
The bulk of his property he divide into two equal portions—one for Agnes Fleming , and the other for their child , if it should be bear alive , and ever come of age .
If it be a girl , it be to inherit the money unconditionally ; but if a boy , only on the stipulation that in his minority he should never have stain his name with any public act of dishonour , meanness , cowardice , or wrong .
He do this , he say , to mark his confidence in the mother , and his conviction—only strengthen by approach death—that the child would share her gentle heart , and noble nature .
If he be disappoint in this expectation , then the money be to come to you : for then , and not till then , when both child be equal , would he recognise your prior claim upon his purse , who have none upon his heart , but have , from an infant , repulse him with coldness and aversion. ” “ My mother , ” say Monks , in a louder tone , “ do what a woman should have do .
She burn this will .
The letter never reach it destination ; but that , and other proof , she keep , in case they ever try to lie away the blot .
The girl ’ s father have the truth from her with every aggravation that her violent hate—I love her for it now—could add .
Goaded by shame and dishonour he flee with his child into a remote corner of Wales , change his very name that his friend might never know of his retreat ; and here , no great while afterwards , he be find dead in his bed .
The girl have leave her home , in secret , some week before ; he have search for her , on foot , in every town and village near ; it be on the night when he return home , assure that she have destroy herself , to hide her shame and his , that his old heart broke. ” There be a short silence here , until Mr. Brownlow take up the thread of the narrative .
“ Years after this , ” he say , “ this man ’ s—Edward Leeford ’ s—mother come to me .
He have leave her , when only eighteen ; rob her of jewel and money ; gamble , squander , forge , and flee to London : where for two year he have associate with the low outcast .
She be sink under a painful and incurable disease , and wish to recover him before she die .
Inquiries be set on foot , and strict search make .
They be unavailing for a long time , but ultimately successful ; and he go back with her to France. ” “ There she die , ” say Monks , “ after a lingering illness ; and , on her death-bed , she bequeath these secret to me , together with her unquenchable and deadly hatred of all whom they involved—though she need not have leave me that , for I have inherit it long before .
She would not believe that the girl have destroy herself , and the child too , but be fill with the impression that a male child have be bear , and be alive .
I swear to her , if ever it cross my path , to hunt it down ; never to let it rest ; to pursue it with the bitter and most unrelenting animosity ; to vent upon it the hatred that I deeply felt , and to spit upon the empty vaunt of that insulting will by drag it , if I could , to the very gallows-foot .
She be right .
He come in my way at last .
I begin well ; and , but for babble drab , I would have finish a I begin ! ” As the villain fold his arm tight together , and mutter curse on himself in the impotence of baffled malice , Mr. Brownlow turn to the terrify group beside him , and explain that the Jew , who have be his old accomplice and confidant , have a large reward for keep Oliver ensnare : of which some part be to be give up , in the event of his be rescue : and that a dispute on this head have lead to their visit to the country house for the purpose of identify him .
“ The locket and ring ? ” say Mr. Brownlow , turn to Monks .
“ I buy them from the man and woman I tell you of , who steal them from the nurse , who steal them from the corpse , ” answer Monks without raise his eye .
“ You know what become of them. ” Mr. Brownlow merely nod to Mr. Grimwig , who disappear with great alacrity , shortly return , push in Mrs. Bumble , and drag her unwilling consort after him .
“ Do my hi ’ s deceive me ! ” cry Mr. Bumble , with ill-feigned enthusiasm , “ or be that little Oliver ?
Oh O-li-ver , if you know ’ d how I ’ ve be a-grieving for you— ” “ Hold your tongue , fool , ” murmur Mrs. Bumble .
“ Isn ’ t natur , natur , Mrs. Bumble ? ” remonstrate the workhouse master .
“ Can ’ t I be suppose to feel—_I_ a brought him up porochially—when I see him a-setting here among lady and gentleman of the very affable description !
I always love that boy a if he ’ d be my—my—my own grandfather , ” say Mr. Bumble , halt for an appropriate comparison .
“ Master Oliver , my dear , you remember the blessed gentleman in the white waistcoat ?
Ah !
he go to heaven last week , in a oak coffin with plated handle , Oliver. ” “ Come , sir , ” say Mr. Grimwig , tartly ; “ suppress your feelings. ” “ I will do my endeavour , sir , ” reply Mr. Bumble .
“ How do you do , sir ?
I hope you be very well. ” This salutation be address to Mr. Brownlow , who have step up to within a short distance of the respectable couple .
He inquire , a he point to Monks , “ Do you know that person ? ” “ No , ” reply Mrs. Bumble flatly .
“ Perhaps _you_ don ’ t ? ” say Mr. Brownlow , address her spouse .
“ I never saw him in all my life , ” say Mr. Bumble .
“ Nor sell him anything , perhaps ? ” “ No , ” reply Mrs. Bumble .
“ You never have , perhaps , a certain gold locket and ring ? ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ Certainly not , ” reply the matron .
“ Why be we bring here to answer to such nonsense a this ? ” Again Mr. Brownlow nod to Mr. Grimwig ; and again that gentleman limp away with extraordinary readiness .
But not again do he return with a stout man and wife ; for this time , he lead in two palsied woman , who shake and totter a they walk .
“ You shut the door the night old Sally die , ” say the foremost one , raise her shrivelled hand , “ but you couldn ’ t shut out the sound , nor stop the chinks. ” “ No , no , ” say the other , look round her and wag her toothless jaw .
“ No , no , no. ” “ We hear her try to tell you what she ’ d do , and saw you take a paper from her hand , and watch you too , next day , to the pawnbroker ’ s shop , ” say the first .
“ Yes , ” add the second , “ and it be a ‘ locket and gold ring. ’ We find out that , and saw it give you .
We be by .
Oh !
we be by. ” “ And we know more than that , ” resume the first , “ for she tell u often , long ago , that the young mother have tell her that , feel she should never get over it , she be on her way , at the time that she be take ill , to die near the grave of the father of the child. ” “ Would you like to see the pawnbroker himself ? ” ask Mr. Grimwig with a motion towards the door .
“ No , ” reply the woman ; “ if he ” —she point to Monks— “ have be coward enough to confess , a I see he have , and you have sound all these hag till you have find the right one , I have nothing more to say .
I _did_ sell them , and they ’ re where you ’ ll never get them .
What then ? ” “ Nothing , ” reply Mr. Brownlow , “ except that it remain for u to take care that neither of you be employ in a situation of trust again .
You may leave the room. ” “ I hope , ” say Mr. Bumble , look about him with great ruefulness , a Mr. Grimwig disappear with the two old woman : “ I hope that this unfortunate little circumstance will not deprive me of my porochial office ? ” “ Indeed it will , ” reply Mr. Brownlow .
“ You may make up your mind to that , and think yourself well off besides. ” “ It be all Mrs. Bumble .
She _would_ do it , ” urge Mr. Bumble ; first look round to ascertain that his partner have leave the room .
“ That be no excuse , ” reply Mr. Brownlow .
“ You be present on the occasion of the destruction of these trinket , and indeed be the more guilty of the two , in the eye of the law ; for the law suppose that your wife act under your direction. ” “ If the law suppose that , ” say Mr. Bumble , squeeze his hat emphatically in both hand , “ the law be a ass—a idiot .
If that ’ s the eye of the law , the law be a bachelor ; and the bad I wish the law be , that his eye may be open by experience—by experience. ” Laying great stress on the repetition of these two word , Mr. Bumble fix his hat on very tight , and put his hand in his pocket , follow his helpmate downstairs .
“ Young lady , ” say Mr. Brownlow , turn to Rose , “ give me your hand .
Do not tremble .
You need not fear to hear the few remain word we have to say. ” “ If they have—I do not know how they can , but if they have—any reference to me , ” say Rose , “ pray let me hear them at some other time .
I have not strength or spirit now. ” “ Nay , ” return the old gentlman , draw her arm through his ; “ you have more fortitude than this , I be sure .
Do you know this young lady , sir ? ” “ Yes , ” reply Monks .
“ I never saw you before , ” say Rose faintly .
“ I have see you often , ” return Monks .
“ The father of the unhappy Agnes have _two_ daughter , ” say Mr. Brownlow .
“ What be the fate of the other—the child ? ” “ The child , ” reply Monks , “ when her father die in a strange place , in a strange name , without a letter , book , or scrap of paper that yield the faint clue by which his friend or relative could be traced—the child be take by some wretched cottager , who rear it a their own. ” “ Go on , ” say Mr. Brownlow , sign to Mrs. Maylie to approach .
“ Go on ! ” “ You couldn ’ t find the spot to which these people have repair , ” say Monks , “ but where friendship fail , hatred will often force a way .
My mother find it , after a year of cunning search—ay , and find the child. ” “ She take it , do she ? ” “ No .
The people be poor and begin to sicken—at least the man did—of their fine humanity ; so she leave it with them , give them a small present of money which would not last long , and promise more , which she never mean to send .
She didn ’ t quite rely , however , on their discontent and poverty for the child ’ s unhappiness , but tell the history of the sister ’ s shame , with such alteration a suited her ; bid them take good heed of the child , for she come of bad blood ; and tell them she be illegitimate , and sure to go wrong at one time or other .
The circumstance countenance all this ; the people believe it ; and there the child drag on an existence , miserable enough even to satisfy u , until a widow lady , reside , then , at Chester , saw the girl by chance , pity her , and take her home .
There be some curse spell , I think , against u ; for in spite of all our effort she remain there and be happy .
I lose sight of her , two or three year ago , and saw her no more until a few month back. ” “ Do you see her now ? ” “ Yes .
Leaning on your arm. ” “ But not the less my niece , ” cry Mrs. Maylie , fold the fainting girl in her arm ; “ not the less my dear child .
I would not lose her now , for all the treasure of the world .
My sweet companion , my own dear girl ! ” “ The only friend I ever have , ” cry Rose , cling to her .
“ The kind , best of friend .
My heart will burst .
I can not bear all this. ” “ You have bear more , and have be , through all , the best and gentle creature that ever shed happiness on every one she know , ” say Mrs. Maylie , embrace her tenderly .
“ Come , come , my love , remember who this be who wait to clasp you in his arm , poor child !
See here—look , look , my dear ! ” “ Not aunt , ” cry Oliver , throw his arm about her neck ; “ I ’ ll never call her aunt—sister , my own dear sister , that something taught my heart to love so dearly from the first !
Rose , dear , darling Rose ! ” Let the tear which fell , and the broken word which be exchange in the long close embrace between the orphan , be sacred .
A father , sister , and mother , be gain , and lost , in that one moment .
Joy and grief be mingle in the cup ; but there be no bitter tear : for even grief itself arise so softened , and clothe in such sweet and tender recollection , that it become a solemn pleasure , and lose all character of pain .
They be a long , long time alone .
A soft tap at the door , at length announce that some one be without .
Oliver open it , glide away , and give place to Harry Maylie .
“ I know it all , ” he say , take a seat beside the lovely girl .
“ Dear Rose , I know it all. ” “ I be not here by accident , ” he add after a lengthened silence ; “ nor have I hear all this to-night , for I know it yesterday—only yesterday .
Do you guess that I have come to remind you of a promise ? ” “ Stay , ” say Rose .
“ You _do_ know all. ” “ All .
You give me leave , at any time within a year , to renew the subject of our last discourse. ” “ I did. ” “ Not to press you to alter your determination , ” pursue the young man , “ but to hear you repeat it , if you would .
I be to lay whatever of station or fortune I might possess at your foot , and if you still adhere to your former determination , I pledge myself , by no word or act , to seek to change it. ” “ The same reason which influence me then , will influence me now , ” say Rose firmly .
“ If I ever owe a strict and rigid duty to her , whose goodness save me from a life of indigence and suffering , when should I ever feel it , a I should to-night ?
It be a struggle , ” say Rose , “ but one I be proud to make ; it be a pang , but one my heart shall bear. ” “ The disclosure of to-night , ” —Harry begin .
“ The disclosure of to-night , ” reply Rose softly , “ leave me in the same position , with reference to you , a that in which I stand before. ” “ You harden your heart against me , Rose , ” urge her lover .
“ Oh Harry , Harry , ” say the young lady , burst into tear ; “ I wish I could , and spare myself this pain. ” “ Then why inflict it on yourself ? ” say Harry , take her hand .
“ Think , dear Rose , think what you have hear to-night. ” “ And what have I hear !
What have I hear ! ” cry Rose .
“ That a sense of his deep disgrace so worked upon my own father that he shun all—there , we have say enough , Harry , we have say enough. ” “ Not yet , not yet , ” say the young man , detain her a she rise .
“ My hop , my wish , prospect , feeling : every thought in life except my love for you : have undergone a change .
I offer you , now , no distinction among a bustling crowd ; no mingling with a world of malice and detraction , where the blood be call into honest cheek by aught but real disgrace and shame ; but a home—a heart and home—yes , dearest Rose , and those , and those alone , be all I have to offer. ” “ What do you mean ! ” she falter .
“ I mean but this—that when I leave you last , I leave you with a firm determination to level all fancied barrier between yourself and me ; resolve that if my world could not be yours , I would make yours mine ; that no pride of birth should curl the lip at you , for I would turn from it .
This I have do .
Those who have shrink from me because of this , have shrink from you , and prove you so far right .
Such power and patronage : such relative of influence and rank : a smile upon me then , look coldly now ; but there be smile field and wave tree in England ’ s rich county ; and by one village church—mine , Rose , my own ! —there stand a rustic dwelling which you can make me proud of , than all the hope I have renounce , measure a thousandfold .
This be my rank and station now , and here I lay it down ! ” “ It ’ s a try thing wait supper for lover , ” say Mr. Grimwig , wake up , and pull his pocket-handkerchief from over his head .
Truth to tell , the supper have be wait a most unreasonable time .
Neither Mrs. Maylie , nor Harry , nor Rose ( who all come in together ) , could offer a word in extenuation .
“ I have serious thought of eat my head to-night , ” say Mr. Grimwig , “ for I begin to think I should get nothing else .
I ’ ll take the liberty , if you ’ ll allow me , of salute the bride that be to be. ” Mr. Grimwig lose no time in carry this notice into effect upon the blushing girl ; and the example , be contagious , be follow both by the doctor and Mr. Brownlow : some people affirm that Harry Maylie have be observe to set it , originally , in a dark room adjoining ; but the best authority consider this downright scandal : he be young and a clergyman .
“ Oliver , my child , ” say Mrs. Maylie , “ where have you be , and why do you look so sad ?
There be tear steal down your face at this moment .
What be the matter ? ” It be a world of disappointment : often to the hope we most cherish , and hop that do our nature the great honour .
Poor Dick be dead !
CHAPTER LII .
FAGIN ’ S LAST NIGHT ALIVE The court be pave , from floor to roof , with human face .
Inquisitive and eager eye peer from every inch of space .
From the rail before the dock , away into the sharp angle of the small corner in the gallery , all look be fix upon one man—Fagin .
Before him and behind : above , below , on the right and on the left : he seem to stand surround by a firmament , all bright with gleam eye .
He stand there , in all this glare of living light , with one hand rest on the wooden slab before him , the other hold to his ear , and his head thrust forward to enable him to catch with great distinctness every word that fell from the preside judge , who be deliver his charge to the jury .
At time , he turn his eye sharply upon them to observe the effect of the slight featherweight in his favour ; and when the point against him be state with terrible distinctness , look towards his counsel , in mute appeal that he would , even then , urge something in his behalf .
Beyond these manifestation of anxiety , he stir not hand or foot .
He have scarcely move since the trial begin ; and now that the judge cease to speak , he still remain in the same strained attitude of close attention , with his gaze bent on him , a though he listen still .
A slight bustle in the court , recall him to himself .
Looking round , he saw that the juryman have turn together , to consider their verdict .
As his eye wander to the gallery , he could see the people rise above each other to see his face : some hastily apply their glass to their eye : and others whisper their neighbour with looks expressive of abhorrence .
A few there be , who seem unmindful of him , and look only to the jury , in impatient wonder how they could delay .
But in no one face—not even among the woman , of whom there be many there—could he read the faint sympathy with himself , or any feeling but one of all-absorbing interest that he should be condemn .
As he saw all this in one bewildered glance , the deathlike stillness come again , and look back he saw that the juryman have turn towards the judge .
Hush !
They only seek permission to retire .
He look , wistfully , into their face , one by one when they pass out , a though to see which way the great number leant ; but that be fruitless .
The jailer touch him on the shoulder .
He follow mechanically to the end of the dock , and sit down on a chair .
The man point it out , or he would not have see it .
He look up into the gallery again .
Some of the people be eat , and some fan themselves with handkerchief ; for the crowded place be very hot .
There be one young man sketch his face in a little note-book .
He wonder whether it be like , and look on when the artist break his pencil-point , and make another with his knife , a any idle spectator might have do .
In the same way , when he turn his eye towards the judge , his mind begin to busy itself with the fashion of his dress , and what it cost , and how he put it on .
There be an old fat gentleman on the bench , too , who have go out , some half an hour before , and now come back .
He wonder within himself whether this man have be to get his dinner , what he have have , and where he have have it ; and pursue this train of careless think until some new object catch his eye and rouse another .
Not that , all this time , his mind be , for an instant , free from one oppressive overwhelm sense of the grave that open at his foot ; it be ever present to him , but in a vague and general way , and he could not fix his thought upon it .
Thus , even while he tremble , and turn burn hot at the idea of speedy death , he fell to count the iron spike before him , and wonder how the head of one have be break off , and whether they would mend it , or leave it a it be .
Then , he think of all the horror of the gallows and the scaffold—and stop to watch a man sprinkle the floor to cool it—and then go on to think again .
At length there be a cry of silence , and a breathless look from all towards the door .
The jury return , and pass him close .
He could glean nothing from their face ; they might as well have be of stone .
Perfect stillness ensued—not a rustle—not a breath—Guilty .
The building rang with a tremendous shout , and another , and another , and then it echo loud groan , that gathered strength a they swell out , like angry thunder .
It be a peal of joy from the populace outside , greet the news that he would die on Monday .
The noise subside , and he be ask if he have anything to say why sentence of death should not be pass upon him .
He have resume his listen attitude , and look intently at his questioner while the demand be make ; but it be twice repeat before he seem to hear it , and then he only mutter that he be an old man—an old man—and so , drop into a whisper , be silent again .
The judge assume the black cap , and the prisoner still stand with the same air and gesture .
A woman in the gallery , utter some exclamation , call forth by this dread solemnity ; he look hastily up a if angry at the interruption , and bent forward yet more attentively .
The address be solemn and impressive ; the sentence fearful to hear .
But he stand , like a marble figure , without the motion of a nerve .
His haggard face be still thrust forward , his under-jaw hang down , and his eye star out before him , when the jailer put his hand upon his arm , and beckon him away .
He gaze stupidly about him for an instant , and obeyed .
They lead him through a paved room under the court , where some prisoner be wait till their turn come , and others be talk to their friend , who crowd round a grate which look into the open yard .
There be nobody there to speak to _him_ ; but , a he pass , the prisoner fell back to render him more visible to the people who be cling to the bar : and they assail him with opprobrious name , and screech and hiss .
He shake his fist , and would have spat upon them ; but his conductor hurry him on , through a gloomy passage light by a few dim lamp , into the interior of the prison .
Here , he be search , that he might not have about him the mean of anticipate the law ; this ceremony perform , they lead him to one of the condemned cell , and leave him there—alone .
He sit down on a stone bench opposite the door , which serve for seat and bedstead ; and cast his blood-shot eye upon the ground , try to collect his thought .
After awhile , he begin to remember a few disjointed fragment of what the judge have say : though it have seem to him , at the time , that he could not hear a word .
These gradually fell into their proper place , and by degree suggest more : so that in a little time he have the whole , almost a it be deliver .
To be hang by the neck , till he be dead—that be the end .
To be hang by the neck till he be dead .
As it come on very dark , he begin to think of all the men he have know who have die upon the scaffold ; some of them through his mean .
They rise up , in such quick succession , that he could hardly count them .
He have see some of them die , —and have joke too , because they die with prayer upon their lip .
With what a rattling noise the drop go down ; and how suddenly they change , from strong and vigorous men to dangle heap of clothes !
Some of them might have inhabit that very cell—sat upon that very spot .
It be very dark ; why didn ’ t they bring a light ?
The cell have be build for many year .
Scores of men must have pass their last hour there .
It be like sit in a vault strewn with dead bodies—the cap , the noose , the pinioned arm , the face that he know , even beneath that hideous veil.—Light , light !
At length , when his hand be raw with beat against the heavy door and wall , two men appear : one bear a candle , which he thrust into an iron candlestick fix against the wall : the other dragging in a mattress on which to pass the night ; for the prisoner be to be leave alone no more .
Then come the night—dark , dismal , silent night .
Other watcher be glad to hear this church-clock strike , for they tell of life and coming day .
To him they bring despair .
The boom of every iron bell come laden with the one , deep , hollow sound—Death .
What avail the noise and bustle of cheerful morning , which penetrate even there , to him ?
It be another form of knell , with mockery add to the warning .
The day pass off .
Day ?
There be no day ; it be go as soon a come—and night come on again ; night so long , and yet so short ; long in it dreadful silence , and short in it fleeting hour .
At one time he rave and blaspheme ; and at another howl and tear his hair .
Venerable men of his own persuasion have come to pray beside him , but he have drive them away with curse .
They renew their charitable effort , and he beat them off .
Saturday night .
He have only one night more to live .
And a he think of this , the day broke—Sunday .
It be not until the night of this last awful day , that a wither sense of his helpless , desperate state come in it full intensity upon his blighted soul ; not that he have ever hold any define or positive hope of mercy , but that he have never be able to consider more than the dim probability of die so soon .
He have speak little to either of the two men , who relieve each other in their attendance upon him ; and they , for their part , make no effort to rouse his attention .
He have sit there , awake , but dream .
Now , he start up , every minute , and with gasp mouth and burning skin , hurry to and fro , in such a paroxysm of fear and wrath that even they—used to such sights—recoiled from him with horror .
He grow so terrible , at last , in all the torture of his evil conscience , that one man could not bear to sit there , eye him alone ; and so the two keep watch together .
He cower down upon his stone bed , and thought of the past .
He have be wound with some missile from the crowd on the day of his capture , and his head be bandage with a linen cloth .
His red hair hang down upon his bloodless face ; his beard be tear , and twist into knot ; his eye shone with a terrible light ; his unwashed flesh crackle with the fever that burn him up .
Eight—nine—then .
If it be not a trick to frighten him , and those be the real hour tread on each other ’ s heel , where would he be , when they come round again !
Eleven !
Another struck , before the voice of the previous hour have cease to vibrate .
At eight , he would be the only mourner in his own funeral train ; at eleven— Those dreadful wall of Newgate , which have hide so much misery and such unspeakable anguish , not only from the eye , but , too often , and too long , from the thought , of men , never hold so dread a spectacle a that .
The few who linger a they pass , and wonder what the man be do who be to be hang to-morrow , would have sleep but ill that night , if they could have see him .
From early in the evening until nearly midnight , little group of two and three present themselves at the lodge-gate , and inquire , with anxious face , whether any reprieve have be receive .
These be answer in the negative , communicate the welcome intelligence to cluster in the street , who point out to one another the door from which he must come out , and show where the scaffold would be build , and , walk with unwilling step away , turn back to conjure up the scene .
By degree they fell off , one by one ; and , for an hour , in the dead of night , the street be leave to solitude and darkness .
The space before the prison be clear , and a few strong barrier , paint black , have be already throw across the road to break the pressure of the expect crowd , when Mr. Brownlow and Oliver appear at the wicket , and present an order of admission to the prisoner , sign by one of the sheriff .
They be immediately admit into the lodge .
“ Is the young gentleman to come too , sir ? ” say the man whose duty it be to conduct them .
“ It ’ s not a sight for child , sir. ” “ It be not indeed , my friend , ” rejoin Mr. Brownlow ; “ but my business with this man be intimately connect with him ; and a this child have see him in the full career of his success and villainy , I think it a well—even at the cost of some pain and fear—that he should see him now. ” These few word have be say apart , so a to be inaudible to Oliver .
The man touch his hat ; and glance at Oliver with some curiousity , open another gate , opposite to that by which they have enter , and lead them on , through dark and wind way , towards the cell .
“ This , ” say the man , stop in a gloomy passage where a couple of workman be make some preparation in profound silence— “ this be the place he pass through .
If you step this way , you can see the door he go out at. ” He lead them into a stone kitchen , fit with copper for dress the prison food , and point to a door .
There be an open grating above it , through which come the sound of men ’ s voice , mingle with the noise of hammering , and the throw down of board .
They be put up the scaffold .
From this place , they pass through several strong gate , open by other turnkey from the inner side ; and , have enter an open yard , ascend a flight of narrow step , and come into a passage with a row of strong door on the left hand .
Motioning them to remain where they be , the turnkey knock at one of these with his bunch of key .
The two attendant , after a little whispering , come out into the passage , stretch themselves a if glad of the temporary relief , and motion the visitor to follow the jailer into the cell .
They do so .
The condemned criminal be seat on his bed , rock himself from side to side , with a countenance more like that of a snared beast than the face of a man .
His mind be evidently wander to his old life , for he continue to mutter , without appear conscious of their presence otherwise than a a part of his vision .
“ Good boy , Charley—well done— ” he mumble .
“ Oliver , too , ha !
ha !
ha !
Oliver too—quite the gentleman now—quite the—take that boy away to bed ! ” The jailer take the disengaged hand of Oliver ; and , whisper him not to be alarm , look on without speaking .
“ Take him away to bed ! ” cry Fagin .
“ Do you hear me , some of you ?
He have be the—the—somehow the cause of all this .
It ’ s worth the money to bring him up to it—Bolter ’ s throat , Bill ; never mind the girl—Bolter ’ s throat as deep a you can cut .
Saw his head off ! ” “ Fagin , ” say the jailer .
“ That ’ s me ! ” cry the Jew , fall instantly , into the attitude of listen he have assume upon his trial .
“ An old man , my Lord ; a very old , old man ! ” “ Here , ” say the turnkey , lay his hand upon his breast to keep him down .
“ Here ’ s somebody want to see you , to ask you some question , I suppose .
Fagin , Fagin !
Are you a man ? ” “ I shan ’ t be one long , ” he reply , look up with a face retain no human expression but rage and terror .
“ Strike them all dead !
What right have they to butcher me ? ” As he speak he catch sight of Oliver and Mr. Brownlow .
Shrinking to the furthest corner of the seat , he demand to know what they want there .
“ Steady , ” say the turnkey , still hold him down .
“ Now , sir , tell him what you want .
Quick , if you please , for he grow bad a the time get on. ” “ You have some paper , ” say Mr. Brownlow advance , “ which be place in your hand , for good security , by a man call Monks. ” “ It ’ s all a lie together , ” reply Fagin .
“ I haven ’ t one—not one. ” “ For the love of God , ” say Mr. Brownlow solemnly , “ do not say that now , upon the very verge of death ; but tell me where they be .
You know that Sikes be dead ; that Monks have confess ; that there be no hope of any further gain .
Where be those paper ? ” “ Oliver , ” cry Fagin , beckon to him .
“ Here , here !
Let me whisper to you. ” “ I be not afraid , ” say Oliver in a low voice , a he relinquish Mr. Brownlow ’ s hand .
“ The paper , ” say Fagin , draw Oliver towards him , “ be in a canvas bag , in a hole a little way up the chimney in the top front-room .
I want to talk to you , my dear .
I want to talk to you. ” “ Yes , yes , ” return Oliver .
“ Let me say a prayer .
Do !
Let me say one prayer .
Say only one , upon your knee , with me , and we will talk till morning. ” “ Outside , outside , ” reply Fagin , push the boy before him towards the door , and look vacantly over his head .
“ Say I ’ ve go to sleep—they ’ ll believe you .
You can get me out , if you take me so .
Now then , now then ! ” “ Oh !
God forgive this wretched man ! ” cry the boy with a burst of tear .
“ That ’ s right , that ’ s right , ” say Fagin .
“ That ’ ll help u on .
This door first .
If I shake and tremble , a we pass the gallows , don ’ t you mind , but hurry on .
Now , now , now ! ” “ Have you nothing else to ask him , sir ? ” inquire the turnkey .
“ No other question , ” reply Mr. Brownlow .
“ If I hop we could recall him to a sense of his position— ” “ Nothing will do that , sir , ” reply the man , shake his head .
“ You have good leave him. ” The door of the cell open , and the attendant return .
“ Press on , press on , ” cry Fagin .
“ Softly , but not so slow .
Faster , faster ! ” The men lay hand upon him , and disengage Oliver from his grasp , hold him back .
He struggle with the power of desperation , for an instant ; and then send up cry upon cry that penetrate even those massive wall , and rang in their ear until they reach the open yard .
It be some time before they leave the prison .
Oliver nearly swoon after this frightful scene , and be so weak that for an hour or more , he have not the strength to walk .
Day be dawn when they again emerge .
A great multitude have already assemble ; the window be fill with people , smoking and playing card to beguile the time ; the crowd be push , quarrel , joking .
Everything told of life and animation , but one dark cluster of object in the centre of all—the black stage , the cross-beam , the rope , and all the hideous apparatus of death .
CHAPTER LIII .
AND LAST The fortune of those who have figure in this tale be nearly close .
The little that remain to their historian to relate , be tell in few and simple word .
Before three month have pass , Rose Fleming and Harry Maylie be marry in the village church which be henceforth to be the scene of the young clergyman ’ s labour ; on the same day they enter into possession of their new and happy home .
Mrs. Maylie take up her abode with her son and daughter-in-law , to enjoy , during the tranquil remainder of her day , the great felicity that age and worth can know—the contemplation of the happiness of those on whom the warm affection and tender care of a well-spent life , have be unceasingly bestow .
It appear , on full and careful investigation , that if the wreck of property remain in the custody of Monks ( which have never prosper either in his hand or in those of his mother ) be equally divide between himself and Oliver , it would yield , to each , little more than three thousand pound .
By the provision of his father ’ s will , Oliver would have be entitle to the whole ; but Mr. Brownlow , unwilling to deprive the elder son of the opportunity of retrieve his former vice and pursue an honest career , propose this mode of distribution , to which his young charge joyfully accede .
Monks , still bear that assume name , retire with his portion to a distant part of the New World ; where , have quickly squander it , he once more fell into his old course , and , after undergo a long confinement for some fresh act of fraud and knavery , at length sunk under an attack of his old disorder , and die in prison .
As far from home , die the chief remain member of his friend Fagin ’ s gang .
Mr. Brownlow adopt Oliver a his son .
Removing with him and the old housekeeper to within a mile of the parsonage-house , where his dear friend reside , he gratify the only remain wish of Oliver ’ s warm and earnest heart , and thus link together a little society , whose condition approach a nearly to one of perfect happiness a can ever be know in this changing world .
Soon after the marriage of the young people , the worthy doctor return to Chertsey , where , bereft of the presence of his old friend , he would have be discontent if his temperament have admit of such a feeling ; and would have turn quite peevish if he have know how .
For two or three month , he content himself with hint that he fear the air begin to disagree with him ; then , find that the place really no longer be , to him , what it have be , he settle his business on his assistant , take a bachelor ’ s cottage outside the village of which his young friend be pastor , and instantaneously recover .
Here he take to gardening , planting , fishing , carpentering , and various other pursuit of a similar kind : all undertaken with his characteristic impetuosity .
In each and all he have since become famous throughout the neighborhood , a a most profound authority .
Before his removal , he have manage to contract a strong friendship for Mr. Grimwig , which that eccentric gentleman cordially reciprocate .
He be accordingly visit by Mr. Grimwig a great many time in the course of the year .
On all such occasion , Mr. Grimwig plant , fish , and carpenter , with great ardour ; do everything in a very singular and unprecedented manner , but always maintain with his favourite asseveration , that his mode be the right one .
On Sundays , he never fail to criticise the sermon to the young clergyman ’ s face : always inform Mr. Losberne , in strict confidence afterwards , that he consider it an excellent performance , but deem it as well not to say so .
It be a standing and very favourite joke , for Mr. Brownlow to rally him on his old prophecy concern Oliver , and to remind him of the night on which they sit with the watch between them , wait his return ; but Mr. Grimwig contend that he be right in the main , and , in proof thereof , remark that Oliver do not come back after all ; which always call forth a laugh on his side , and increase his good humour .
Mr. Noah Claypole : receive a free pardon from the Crown in consequence of be admit approver against Fagin : and consider his profession not altogether a safe a one a he could wish : be , for some little time , at a loss for the mean of a livelihood , not burden with too much work .
After some consideration , he go into business a an informer , in which call he realise a genteel subsistence .
His plan be , to walk out once a week during church time attend by Charlotte in respectable attire .
The lady faint away at the door of charitable publican , and the gentleman be accommodate with three-penny worth of brandy to restore her , lay an information next day , and pocket half the penalty .
Sometimes Mr. Claypole faint himself , but the result be the same .
Mr. and Mrs. Bumble , deprive of their situation , be gradually reduce to great indigence and misery , and finally become pauper in that very same workhouse in which they have once lord it over others .
Mr. Bumble have be hear to say , that in this reverse and degradation , he have not even spirit to be thankful for be separate from his wife .
As to Mr. Giles and Brittles , they still remain in their old post , although the former be bald , and the last-named boy quite grey .
They sleep at the parsonage , but divide their attention so equally among it inmate , and Oliver and Mr. Brownlow , and Mr. Losberne , that to this day the villager have never be able to discover to which establishment they properly belong .
Master Charles Bates , appal by Sikes ’ s crime , fell into a train of reflection whether an honest life be not , after all , the best .
Arriving at the conclusion that it certainly be , he turn his back upon the scene of the past , resolve to amend it in some new sphere of action .
He struggle hard , and suffer much , for some time ; but , have a contented disposition , and a good purpose , succeed in the end ; and , from be a farmer ’ s drudge , and a carrier ’ s lad , he be now the merry young grazier in all Northamptonshire .
And now , the hand that trace these word , falter , a it approach the conclusion of it task ; and would weave , for a little long space , the thread of these adventure .
I would fain linger yet with a few of those among whom I have so long move , and share their happiness by endeavour to depict it .
I would show Rose Maylie in all the bloom and grace of early womanhood , shed on her seclude path in life soft and gentle light , that fell on all who tread it with her , and shone into their heart .
I would paint her the life and joy of the fire-side circle and the lively summer group ; I would follow her through the sultry field at noon , and hear the low tone of her sweet voice in the moonlit evening walk ; I would watch her in all her goodness and charity abroad , and the smile untiring discharge of domestic duty at home ; I would paint her and her dead sister ’ s child happy in their love for one another , and pass whole hour together in picture the friend whom they have so sadly lose ; I would summon before me , once again , those joyous little face that cluster round her knee , and listen to their merry prattle ; I would recall the tone of that clear laugh , and conjure up the sympathising tear that glisten in the soft blue eye .
These , and a thousand look and smile , and turn of thought and speech—I would fain recall them every one .
How Mr. Brownlow go on , from day to day , fill the mind of his adopt child with store of knowledge , and become attach to him , more and more , a his nature develop itself , and show the thrive seed of all he wish him to become—how he trace in him new trait of his early friend , that awaken in his own bosom old remembrance , melancholy and yet sweet and soothing—how the two orphan , try by adversity , remember it lesson in mercy to others , and mutual love , and fervent thanks to Him who have protect and preserve them—these be all matter which need not to be tell .
I have say that they be truly happy ; and without strong affection and humanity of heart , and gratitude to that Being whose code be Mercy , and whose great attribute be Benevolence to all thing that breathe , happiness can never be attain .
Within the altar of the old village church there stand a white marble tablet , which bear a yet but one word : “ AGNES. ” There be no coffin in that tomb ; and may it be many , many year , before another name be place above it !
But , if the spirit of the Dead ever come back to earth , to visit spot hallow by the love—the love beyond the grave—of those whom they know in life , I believe that the shade of Agnes sometimes hover round that solemn nook .
I believe it none the less because that nook be in a Church , and she be weak and err .
